CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA AS AMENDED AND IN FORCE NOVEMBER 6, 2018 PREAMBLE We, the People of the State of California, grateful to Almighty God for our freedom, in order to secure and perpetuate its blessings, do establish this Constitution. ARTICLE I DECLARATION OF RIGHTS SECTION 1. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 1, below.] [Inalienable Rights] SECTION 1. All people are by nature free and independent and have inalienable rights. Among these are enjoying and defending life and liberty, acquiring, possessing, and protecting property, and pursuing and obtaining safety, happiness, and privacy. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Liberty of Speech and of the Press—Newspersons’ Refusal to Disclose Information Sources Not Adjudged in Contempt] SEC. 2. (a) Every person may freely speak, write and publish his or her sentiments on all subjects, being responsible for the abuse of this right. A law may not restrain or abridge liberty of speech or press. (b) A publisher, editor, reporter, or other person connected with or employed upon a newspaper, magazine, or other periodical publication, or by a press association or wire service, or any person who has been so connected or employed, shall not be adjudged in contempt by a judicial, legislative, or administrative body, or any other body having the power to issue subpoenas, for refusing to disclose the source of any information procured while so connected or employed for publication in a newspaper, magazine or other periodical publication, or for refusing to disclose any unpublished information obtained or prepared in gathering, receiving or processing of information for communication to the public. Nor shall a radio or television news reporter or other person connected with or employed by a radio or television station, or any person who has been so connected or employed, be so adjudged in contempt for refusing to disclose the source of any information procured while so connected or employed for news or news commentary purposes on radio or television, or for refusing to disclose any unpublished information obtained or prepared in gathering, receiving or processing of information for communication to the public. Adopted by the people on May 7, 1879. Certain spelling and capitalization variances reflect State Printer’s style in effect at time of adoption of amendments. As used in this subdivision, “unpublished information” includes information not disseminated to the public by the person from whom disclosure is sought, whether or not related information has been disseminated and includes, but is not limited to, all notes, outtakes, photographs, tapes or other data of whatever sort not itself disseminated to the public through a medium of communication, whether or not published information based upon or related to such material has been disseminated. [As amended June 3, 1980.] [Right to Assemble and to Petition—Right of Access to Government Information] SEC. 3. (a) The people have the right to instruct their representatives, petition government for redress of grievances, and assemble freely to consult for the common good. (b) (1) The people have the right of access to information concerning the conduct of the people’s business, and, therefore, the meetings of public bodies and the writings of public officials and agencies shall be open to public scrutiny. (2) A statute, court rule, or other authority, including those in effect on the effective date of this subdivision, shall be broadly construed if it furthers the people’s right of access, and narrowly construed if it limits the right of access. A statute, court rule, or other authority adopted after the effective date of this subdivision that limits the right of access shall be adopted with findings demonstrating the interest protected by the limitation and the need for protecting that interest. (3) Nothing in this subdivision supersedes or modifies the right of privacy guaranteed by Section 1 or affects the construction of any statute, court rule, or other authority to the extent that it protects that right to privacy, including any statutory procedures governing discovery or disclosure of information concerning the official performance or professional qualifications of a peace officer. (4) Nothing in this subdivision supersedes or modifies any provision of this Constitution, including the guarantees that a person may not be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law, or denied equal protection of the laws, as provided in Section 7. (5) This subdivision does not repeal or nullify, expressly or by implication, any constitutional or statutory exception to the right of access to public records or meetings of public bodies that is in effect on the effective date of this subdivision, including, but not limited to, any statute protecting the confidentiality of law enforcement and prosecution records. (6) Nothing in this subdivision repeals, nullifies, supersedes, or modifies protections for the confidentiality of proceedings and records of the Legislature, the Members of the Legislature, and its employees, committees, and caucuses provided by Section 7 of Article IV, state law, or legislative rules adopted in furtherance of those provisions; nor does it affect the scope of permitted discovery in judicial or administrative proceedings regarding deliberations of the Legislature, the Members of the Legislature, and its employees, committees, and caucuses. (7) In order to ensure public access to the meetings of public bodies and the writings of public officials and agencies, as specified in paragraph (1), each local agency is hereby required to comply with the California Public Records Act (Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 6250) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the Government Code) and the Ralph M. Brown Act (Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 54950) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government Code), and with any subsequent statutory enactment amending either act, enacting a successor act, or amending any successor act that contains findings demonstrating that the statutory enactment furthers the purposes of this section. [As amended June 3, 2014.] SEC. 4. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 4, below.] [Liberty of Conscience] SEC. 4. Free exercise and enjoyment of religion without discrimination or preference are guaranteed. This liberty of conscience does not excuse acts that are licentious or inconsistent with the peace or safety of the State. The Legislature shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion. A person is not incompetent to be a witness or juror because of his or her opinions on religious beliefs. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 5. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 5, below.] [The Military] SEC. 5. The military is subordinate to civil power. A standing army may not be maintained in peacetime. Soldiers may not be quartered in any house in wartime except as prescribed by law, or in peacetime without the owner’s consent. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 6. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 6, below.] [Slavery Prohibited] SEC. 6. Slavery is prohibited. Involuntary servitude is prohibited except to punish crime. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Due Process of Law—Use of Pupil School Assignment or Pupil Transportation] SEC. 7. (a) A person may not be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law or denied equal protection of the laws; provided, that nothing contained herein or elsewhere in this Constitution imposes upon the State of California or any public entity, board, or official any obligations or responsibilities which exceed those imposed by the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution with respect to the use of pupil school assignment or pupil transportation. In enforcing this subdivision or any other provision of this Constitution, no court of this State may impose upon the State of California or any public entity, board, or official any obligation or responsibility with respect to the use of pupil school assignment or pupil transportation, (1) except to remedy a specific violation by such party that would also constitute a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution, and (2) unless a federal court would be permitted under federal decisional law to impose that obligation or responsibility upon such party to remedy the specific violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment of the United States Constitution. Except as may be precluded by the Constitution of the United States, every existing judgment, decree, writ, or other order of a court of this State, whenever rendered, which includes provisions regarding pupil school assignment or pupil transportation, or which requires a plan including any such provisions shall, upon application to a court having jurisdiction by any interested person, be modified to conform to the provisions of this subdivision as amended, as applied to the facts which exist at the time of such modification. In all actions or proceedings arising under or seeking application of the amendments to this subdivision proposed by the Legislature at its 1979–80 Regular Session, all courts, wherein such actions or proceedings are or may hereafter be pending, shall give such actions or proceedings first precedence over all other civil actions therein. Nothing herein shall prohibit the governing board of a school district from voluntarily continuing or commencing a school integration plan after the effective date of this subdivision as amended. In amending this subdivision, the Legislature and people of the State of California find and declare that this amendment is necessary to serve compelling public interests, including those of making the most effective use of the limited financial resources now and prospectively available to support public education, maximizing the educational opportunities and protecting the health and safety of all public school pupils, enhancing the ability of parents to participate in the educational process, preserving harmony and tranquility in this State and its public schools, preventing the waste of scarce fuel resources, and protecting the environment. [Privileges and Immunities] (b) A citizen or class of citizens may not be granted privileges or immunities not granted on the same terms to all citizens. Privileges or immunities granted by the Legislature may be altered or revoked. [As amended November 6, 1979.] [Marriage] SEC. 7.5. Only marriage between a man and a woman is valid or recognized in California. [New section adopted November 4, 2008. Initiative measure.] [Sex, Race, Etc., Not a Disqualification for Business] SEC. 8. A person may not be disqualified from entering or pursuing a business, profession, vocation, or employment because of sex, race, creed, color, or national or ethnic origin. [Former Section 18 of Article XX, as renumbered and amended November 5, 1974.] SEC. 9. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 9, below.] [Bill of Attainder—Ex Post Facto Law—Obligation of Contract] SEC. 9. A bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts may not be passed. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 10. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 10, below.] [Detention of Witnesses—No Imprisonment for Debt] SEC. 10. Witnesses may not be unreasonably detained. A person may not be imprisoned in a civil action for debt or tort, or in peacetime for a militia fine. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 11. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 11, below.] [Suspension of Habeas Corpus] SEC. 11. Habeas corpus may not be suspended unless required by public safety in cases of rebellion or invasion. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Bail—Release on Own Recognizance] SEC. 12. A person shall be released on bail by sufficient sureties, except for: (a) Capital crimes when the facts are evident or the presumption great; (b) Felony offenses involving acts of violence on another person, or felony sexual assault offenses on another person, when the facts are evident or the presumption great and the court finds based upon clear and convincing evidence that there is a substantial likelihood the person’s release would result in great bodily harm to others; or (c) Felony offenses when the facts are evident or the presumption great and the court finds based on clear and convincing evidence that the person has threatened another with great bodily harm and that there is a substantial likelihood that the person would carry out the threat if released. Excessive bail may not be required. In fixing the amount of bail, the court shall take into consideration the seriousness of the offense charged, the previous criminal record of the defendant, and the probability of his or her appearing at the trial or hearing of the case. A person may be released on his or her own recognizance in the court’s discretion. [As amended November 8, 1994.] SEC. 13. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 13, below.] [Unreasonable Seizure and Search—Warrant] SEC. 13. The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable seizures and searches may not be violated; and a warrant may not issue except on probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, particularly describing the place to be searched and the persons and things to be seized. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 14. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 14, below.] [Felony Defendant Before Magistrate—Prosecutions] SEC. 14. Felonies shall be prosecuted as provided by law, either by indictment or, after examination and commitment by a magistrate, by information. A person charged with a felony by complaint subscribed under penalty of perjury and on file in a court in the county where the felony is triable shall be taken without unnecessary delay before a magistrate of that court. The magistrate shall immediately give the defendant a copy of the complaint, inform the defendant of the defendant’s right to counsel, allow the defendant a reasonable time to send for counsel, and on the defendant’s request read the complaint to the defendant. On the defendant’s request the magistrate shall require a peace officer to transmit within the county where the court is located a message to counsel named by defendant. A person unable to understand English who is charged with a crime has a right to an interpreter throughout the proceedings. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Felony—Prosecution by Indictment] SEC. 14.1. If a felony is prosecuted by indictment, there shall be no post indictment preliminary hearing. [New section adopted June 5, 1990. Initiative measure.] SEC. 14. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 15. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 15, below.] [Criminal Prosecutions—Rights of Defendant—Due Process of Law—Jeopardy— Depositions—Assistance of Counsel] SEC. 15. The defendant in a criminal cause has the right to a speedy public trial, to compel attendance of witnesses in the defendant’s behalf, to have the assistance of counsel for the defendant’s defense, to be personally present with counsel, and to be confronted with the witnesses against the defendant. The Legislature may provide for the deposition of a witness in the presence of the defendant and the defendant’s counsel. Persons may not twice be put in jeopardy for the same offense, be compelled in a criminal cause to be a witness against themselves, or be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Trial by Jury] SEC. 16. Trial by jury is an inviolate right and shall be secured to all, but in a civil cause three-fourths of the jury may render a verdict. A jury may be waived in a criminal cause by the consent of both parties expressed in open court by the defendant and the defendant’s counsel. In a civil cause a jury may be waived by the consent of the parties expressed as prescribed by statute. [Number of Jurors in Civil Trials] In civil causes the jury shall consist of 12 persons or a lesser number agreed on by the parties in open court. In civil causes other than causes within the appellate jurisdiction of the court of appeal the Legislature may provide that the jury shall consist of eight persons or a lesser number agreed on by the parties in open court. [Number of Jurors in Criminal Trials] In criminal actions in which a felony is charged, the jury shall consist of 12 persons. In criminal actions in which a misdemeanor is charged, the jury shall consist of 12 persons or a lesser number agreed on by the parties in open court. [As amended June 2, 1998.] SEC. 17. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 17, below.] [Unusual Punishment—Excessive Fines] SEC. 17. Cruel or unusual punishment may not be inflicted or excessive fines imposed. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 18. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 18, below.] [Treason] SEC. 18. Treason against the State consists only in levying war against it, adhering to its enemies, or giving them aid and comfort. A person may not be convicted of treason except on the evidence of two witnesses to the same overt act or by confession in open court. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 19. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 19, below.] [Eminent Domain] SEC. 19. (a) Private property may be taken or damaged for a public use and only when just compensation, ascertained by a jury unless waived, has first been paid to, or into court for, the owner. The Legislature may provide for possession by the condemner following commencement of eminent domain proceedings upon deposit in court and prompt release to the owner of money determined by the court to be the probable amount of just compensation. (b) The State and local governments are prohibited from acquiring by eminent domain an owner-occupied residence for the purpose of conveying it to a private person. (c) Subdivision (b) of this section does not apply when State or local government exercises the power of eminent domain for the purpose of protecting public health and safety; preventing serious, repeated criminal activity; responding to an emergency; or remedying environmental contamination that poses a threat to public health and safety. (d) Subdivision (b) of this section does not apply when State or local government exercises the power of eminent domain for the purpose of acquiring private property for a public work or improvement. (e) For the purpose of this section: 1. “Conveyance” means a transfer of real property whether by sale, lease, gift, franchise, or otherwise. 2. “Local government” means any city, including a charter city, county, city and county, school district, special district, authority, regional entity, redevelopment agency, or any other political subdivision within the State. 3. “Owner-occupied residence” means real property that is improved with a single-family residence such as a detached home, condominium, or townhouse and that is the owner or owners’ principal place of residence for at least one year prior to the State or local government’s initial written offer to purchase the property. Owner-occupied residence also includes a residential dwelling unit attached to or detached from such a single-family residence which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. 4. “Person” means any individual or association, or any business entity, including, but not limited to, a partnership, corporation, or limited liability company. 5. “Public work or improvement” means facilities or infrastructure for the delivery of public services such as education, police, fire protection, parks, recreation, emergency medical, public health, libraries, food protection, streets or highways, public transit, railroad, airports and seaports; utility, common carrier or other similar projects such as energy-related, communication-related, water-related and wastewater-related facilities or infrastructure; projects identified by a State or local government for recovery from natural disasters; and private uses incidental to, or necessary for, the public work or improvement. 6. “State” means the State of California and any of its agencies or departments. [As amended June 3, 2008. Initiative measure.] SEC. 20. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 20, below.] [Rights of Noncitizens] SEC. 20. Noncitizens have the same property rights as citizens. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 21. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 21, below.] [Separate Property of Husband and Wife] SEC. 21. Property owned before marriage or acquired during marriage by gift, will, or inheritance is separate property. [Former Section 8 of Article XX, as renumbered November 5, 1974.] SEC. 22. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 22, below.] [No Property Qualification for Electors] SEC. 22. The right to vote or hold office may not be conditioned by a property qualification. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 23. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 23, below.] [Grand Juries] SEC. 23. One or more grand juries shall be drawn and summoned at least once a year in each county. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Constitutional Rights—Rights Reserved] SEC. 24. Rights guaranteed by this Constitution are not dependent on those guaranteed by the United States Constitution. In criminal cases the rights of a defendant to equal protection of the laws, to due process of law, to the assistance of counsel, to be personally present with counsel, to a speedy and public trial, to compel the attendance of witnesses, to confront the witnesses against him or her, to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures, to privacy, to not be compelled to be a witness against himself or herself, to not be placed twice in jeopardy for the same offense, and to not suffer the imposition of cruel or unusual punishment, shall be construed by the courts of this State in a manner consistent with the Constitution of the United States. This Constitution shall not be construed by the courts to afford greater rights to criminal defendants than those afforded by the Constitution of the United States, nor shall it be construed to afford greater rights to minors in juvenile proceedings on criminal causes than those afforded by the Constitution of the United States. This declaration of rights may not be construed to impair or deny others retained by the people. [As amended June 5, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Right to Fish] SECTION 25. The people shall have the right to fish upon and from the public lands of the State and in the waters thereof, excepting upon lands set aside for fish hatcheries, and no land owned by the State shall ever be sold or transferred without reserving in the people the absolute right to fish thereupon; and no law shall ever be passed making it a crime for the people to enter upon the public lands within this State for the purpose of fishing in any water containing fish that have been planted therein by the State; provided, that the Legislature may by statute, provide for the season when and the conditions under which the different species of fish may be taken. [New section adopted November 8, 1910.] SEC. 26. [Renumbered Section 1 of Article II June 8, 1976. See Section 26, below.] [Constitution Mandatory and Prohibitory] SEC. 26. The provisions of this Constitution are mandatory and prohibitory, unless by express words they are declared to be otherwise. [Former Section 28, as renumbered June 8, 1976.] SEC. 26a. [Repealed November 8, 1949.] [Death Penalty] SEC. 27. All statutes of this State in effect on February 17, 1972, requiring, authorizing, imposing, or relating to the death penalty are in full force and effect, subject to legislative amendment or repeal by statute, initiative, or referendum. The death penalty provided for under those statutes shall not be deemed to be, or to constitute, the infliction of cruel or unusual punishments within the meaning of Article 1, Section 6 nor shall such punishment for such offenses be deemed to contravene any other provision of this constitution. [New section adopted November 7, 1972. Initiative measure.] [“The Victims’ Bill of Rights”] SEC. 28. (a) The People of the State of California find and declare all of the following: (1) Criminal activity has a serious impact on the citizens of California. The rights of victims of crime and their families in criminal prosecutions are a subject of grave statewide concern. (2) Victims of crime are entitled to have the criminal justice system view criminal acts as serious threats to the safety and welfare of the people of California. The enactment of comprehensive provisions and laws ensuring a bill of rights for victims of crime, including safeguards in the criminal justice system fully protecting those rights and ensuring that crime victims are treated with respect and dignity, is a matter of high public importance. California’s victims of crime are largely dependent upon the proper functioning of government, upon the criminal justice system and upon the expeditious enforcement of the rights of victims of crime described herein, in order to protect the public safety and to secure justice when the public safety has been compromised by criminal activity. (3) The rights of victims pervade the criminal justice system. These rights include personally held and enforceable rights described in paragraphs (1) through (17) of subdivision (b). (4) The rights of victims also include broader shared collective rights that are held in common with all of the People of the State of California and that are enforceable through the enactment of laws and through good-faith efforts and actions of California’s elected, appointed, and publicly employed officials. These rights encompass the expectation shared with all of the people of California that persons who commit felonious acts causing injury to innocent victims will be appropriately and thoroughly investigated, appropriately detained in custody, brought before the courts of California even if arrested outside the State, tried by the courts in a timely manner, sentenced, and sufficiently punished so that the public safety is protected and encouraged as a goal of highest importance. (5) Victims of crime have a collectively shared right to expect that persons convicted of committing criminal acts are sufficiently punished in both the manner and the length of the sentences imposed by the courts of the State of California. This right includes the right to expect that the punitive and deterrent effect of custodial sentences imposed by the courts will not be undercut or diminished by the granting of rights and privileges to prisoners that are not required by any provision of the United States Constitution or by the laws of this State to be granted to any person incarcerated in a penal or other custodial facility in this State as a punishment or correction for the commission of a crime. (6) Victims of crime are entitled to finality in their criminal cases. Lengthy appeals and other post-judgment proceedings that challenge criminal convictions, frequent and difficult parole hearings that threaten to release criminal offenders, and the ongoing threat that the sentences of criminal wrongdoers will be reduced, prolong the suffering of crime victims for many years after the crimes themselves have been perpetrated. This prolonged suffering of crime victims and their families must come to an end. (7) Finally, the People find and declare that the right to public safety extends to public and private primary, elementary, junior high, and senior high school, and community college, California State University, University of California, and private college and university campuses, where students and staff have the right to be safe and secure in their persons. (8) To accomplish the goals it is necessary that the laws of California relating to the criminal justice process be amended in order to protect the legitimate rights of victims of crime. (b) In order to preserve and protect a victim’s rights to justice and due process, a victim shall be entitled to the following rights: (1) To be treated with fairness and respect for his or her privacy and dignity, and to be free from intimidation, harassment, and abuse, throughout the criminal or juvenile justice process. (2) To be reasonably protected from the defendant and persons acting on behalf of the defendant. (3) To have the safety of the victim and the victim’s family considered in fixing the amount of bail and release conditions for the defendant. (4) To prevent the disclosure of confidential information or records to the defendant, the defendant’s attorney, or any other person acting on behalf of the defendant, which could be used to locate or harass the victim or the victim’s family or which disclose confidential communications made in the course of medical or counseling treatment, or which are otherwise privileged or confidential by law. (5) To refuse an interview, deposition, or discovery request by the defendant, the defendant’s attorney, or any other person acting on behalf of the defendant, and to set reasonable conditions on the conduct of any such interview to which the victim consents. (6) To reasonable notice of and to reasonably confer with the prosecuting agency, upon request, regarding, the arrest of the defendant if known by the prosecutor, the charges fled, the determination whether to extradite the defendant, and, upon request, to be notified of and informed before any pretrial disposition of the case. (7) To reasonable notice of all public proceedings, including delinquency proceedings, upon request, at which the defendant and the prosecutor are entitled to be present and of all parole or other post-conviction release proceedings, and to be present at all such proceedings. (8) To be heard, upon request, at any proceeding, including any delinquency proceeding, involving a post-arrest release decision, plea, sentencing, post-conviction release decision, or any proceeding in which a right of the victim is at issue. (9) To a speedy trial and a prompt and final conclusion of the case and any related post-judgment proceedings. (10) To provide information to a probation department official conducting a pre-sentence investigation concerning the impact of the offense on the victim and the victim’s family and any sentencing recommendations before the sentencing of the defendant. (11) To receive, upon request, the pre-sentence report when available to the defendant, except for those portions made confidential by law. (12) To be informed, upon request, of the conviction, sentence, place and time of incarceration, or other disposition of the defendant, the scheduled release date of the defendant, and the release of or the escape by the defendant from custody. (13) To restitution. (A) It is the unequivocal intention of the People of the State of California that all persons who suffer losses as a result of criminal activity shall have the right to seek and secure restitution from the persons convicted of the crimes causing the losses they suffer. (B) Restitution shall be ordered from the convicted wrongdoer in every case, regardless of the sentence or disposition imposed, in which a crime victim suffers a loss. (C) All monetary payments, monies, and property collected from any person who has been ordered to make restitution shall be first applied to pay the amounts ordered as restitution to the victim. (14) To the prompt return of property when no longer needed as evidence. (15) To be informed of all parole procedures, to participate in the parole process, to provide information to the parole authority to be considered before the parole of the offender, and to be notified, upon request, of the parole or other release of the offender. (16) To have the safety of the victim, the victim’s family, and the general public considered before any parole or other post-judgment release decision is made. (17) To be informed of the rights enumerated in paragraphs (1) through (16). (c) (1) A victim, the retained attorney of a victim, a lawful representative of the victim, or the prosecuting attorney upon request of the victim, may enforce the rights enumerated in subdivision (b) in any trial or appellate court with jurisdiction over the case as a matter of right. The court shall act promptly on such a request. (2) This section does not create any cause of action for compensation or damages against the State, any political subdivision of the State, any officer, employee, or agent of the State or of any of its political subdivisions, or any officer or employee of the court. (d) The granting of these rights to victims shall not be construed to deny or disparage other rights possessed by victims. The court in its discretion may extend the right to be heard at sentencing to any person harmed by the defendant. The parole authority shall extend the right to be heard at a parole hearing to any person harmed by the offender. (e) As used in this section, a “victim” is a person who suffers direct or threatened physical, psychological, or financial harm as a result of the commission or attempted commission of a crime or delinquent act. The term “victim” also includes the person’s spouse, parents, children, siblings, or guardian, and includes a lawful representative of a crime victim who is deceased, a minor, or physically or psychologically incapacitated. The term “victim” does not include a person in custody for an offense, the accused, or a person whom the court finds would not act in the best interests of a minor victim. (f) In addition to the enumerated rights provided in subdivision (b) that are personally enforceable by victims as provided in subdivision (c), victims of crime have additional rights that are shared with all of the People of the State of California. These collectively held rights include, but are not limited to, the following: (1) Right to Safe Schools. All students and staff of public primary, elementary, junior high, and senior high schools, and community colleges, colleges, and universities have the inalienable right to attend campuses which are safe, secure and peaceful. (2) Right to Truth-in-Evidence. Except as provided by statute hereafter enacted by a two-thirds vote of the membership in each house of the Legislature, relevant evidence shall not be excluded in any criminal proceed-ing, including pretrial and post conviction motions and hearings, or in any trial or hearing of a juvenile for a criminal offense, whether heard in juvenile or adult court. Nothing in this section shall affect any existing statutory rule of evidence relating to privilege or hearsay, or Evidence Code Sections 352, 782 or 1103. Nothing in this section shall affect any existing statutory or constitutional right of the press. (3) Public Safety Bail. A person may be released on bail by sufficient sureties, except for capital crimes when the facts are evident or the presumption great. Excessive bail may not be required. In setting, reducing or denying bail, the judge or magistrate shall take into consideration the protection of the public, the safety of the victim, the seriousness of the offense charged, the previous criminal record of the defendant, and the probability of his or her appearing at the trial or hearing of the case. Public safety and the safety of the victim shall be the primary considerations. A person may be released on his or her own recognizance in the court’s discretion, subject to the same factors considered in setting bail. Before any person arrested for a serious felony may be released on bail, a hearing may be held before the magistrate or judge, and the prosecuting attorney and the victim shall be given notice and reasonable opportunity to be heard on the matter. When a judge or magistrate grants or denies bail or release on a person’s own recognizance, the reasons for that decision shall be stated in the record and included in the court’s minutes. (4) Use of Prior Convictions. Any prior felony conviction of any person in any criminal proceeding, whether adult or juvenile, shall subsequently be used without limitation for purposes of impeachment or enhancement of sentence in any criminal proceeding. When a prior felony conviction is an element of any felony offense, it shall be proven to the trier of fact in open court. (5) Truth in Sentencing. Sentences that are individually imposed upon convicted criminal wrongdoers based upon the facts and circumstances surrounding their cases shall be carried out in compliance with the courts’ sentencing orders, and shall not be substantially diminished by early release policies intended to alleviate overcrowding in custodial facilities. The legislative branch shall ensure sufficient funding to adequately house inmates for the full terms of their sentences, except for statutorily authorized credits which reduce those sentences. (6) Reform of the parole process. The current process for parole hearings is excessive, especially in cases in which the defendant has been convicted of murder. The parole hearing process must be reformed for the benefit of crime victims. (g) As used in this article, the term “serious felony” is any crime defined in subdivision (c) of Section 1192.7 of the Penal Code, or any successor statute. [As amended November 4, 2008. Initiative measure.] [Criminal Cases—Due Process of Law—Speedy and Public Trial] SEC. 29. In a criminal case, the people of the State of California have the right to due process of law and to a speedy and public trial. [New section adopted June 5, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Criminal Cases—Jointure-Hearsay Evidence—Discovery] SEC. 30. (a) This Constitution shall not be construed by the courts to prohibit the joining of criminal cases as prescribed by the Legislature or by the people through the initiative process. (b) In order to protect victims and witnesses in criminal cases, hearsay evidence shall be admissible at preliminary hearings, as prescribed by the Legislature or by the people through the initiative process. (c) In order to provide for fair and speedy trials, discovery in criminal cases shall be reciprocal in nature, as prescribed by the Legislature or by the people through the initiative process. [New section adopted June 5, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Prohibition Against Discrimination or Preferential Treatment] SEC. 31. (a) The State shall not discriminate against, or grant preferential treatment to, any individual or group on the basis of race, sex, color, ethnicity, or national origin in the operation of public employment, public education, or public contracting. (b) This section shall apply only to action taken after the section’s effective date. (c) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as prohibiting bonafide qualifications based on sex which are reasonably necessary to the normal operation of public employment, public education, or public contracting. (d) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as invalidating any court order or consent decree which is in force as of the effective date of this section. (e) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as prohibiting action which must be taken to establish or maintain eligibility for any federal program, where ineligibility would result in a loss of federal funds to the State. (f) For the purposes of this section, “State” shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the State itself, any city, county, city and county, public university system, including the University of California, community college district, school district, special district, or any other political sub-division or governmental instrumentality of or within the State. (g) The remedies available for violations of this section shall be the same, regardless of the injured party’s race, sex, color, ethnicity, or national origin, as are otherwise available for violations of then-existing California anti discrimination law. (h) This section shall be self-executing. If any part or parts of this section are found to be in conflict with federal law or the United States Constitution, the section shall be implemented to the maximum extent that federal law and the United States Constitution permit. Any provision held invalid shall be severable from the remaining portions of this section. [New section adopted November 5, 1996. Initiative measure.] [Parole Consideration for Nonviolent Felony Offenses—Credit Earning] SEC. 32. (a) The following provisions are hereby enacted to enhance public safety, improve rehabilitation, and avoid the release of prisoners by federal court order, notwithstanding anything in this article or any other provision of law: (1) Parole Consideration: any person convicted of a nonviolent felony offense and sentenced to state prison shall be eligible for parole consideration after completing the full term for his or her primary offense. (A) For purposes of this section only, the full term for the primary offense means the longest term of imprisonment imposed by the court for any offense, excluding the imposition of an enhancement, consecutive sentence, or alternative sentence. (2) Credit Earning: The Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation shall have authority to award credits earned for good behavior and approved rehabilitative or educational achievements. (b) The Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation shall adopt regulations in furtherance of these provisions, and the Secretary of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation shall certify that these regulations protect and enhance public safety. [New Section adopted November 8, 2016. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE II. [Repealed November 7, 1972. See Article II, below.] ARTICLE II VOTING, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM, AND RECALL [Heading as amended June 8, 1976.] SEC. 1. [Renumbered Section 2 June 8, 1976. See Section 1, below.] [Purpose of Government] SECTION 1. All political power is inherent in the people. Government is instituted for their protection, security, and benefit, and they have the right to alter or reform it when the public good may require. [Former Section 26 of Article I, as renumbered June 8, 1976.] SEC. 1. [Repealed November 7, 1972.] SEC. 2. [Renumbered Section 3 June 8, 1976. See Section 2, below.] [Right to Vote] SEC. 2. A United States citizen 18 years of age and resident in this State may vote. [Former Section 1, as renumbered June 8, 1976.] SEC. 2.5. [Repealed November 7, 1972. See Section 2.5, below.] [Right to Have Vote Counted] SEC. 2.5. A voter who casts a vote in an election in accordance with the laws of this State shall have that vote counted. [New Section adopted November 5, 2002.] SEC. 2 [Repealed November 7, 1972.] SEC. 3. [Renumbered Section 4 June 8, 1976. See Section 3, below.] [Residence—Registration—Free Elections] SEC. 3. The Legislature shall define residence and provide for registration and free elections. [Former Section 2, as renumbered June 8, 1976.] SEC. 4. [Renumbered Section 5 June 8, 1976. See Section 4, below.] [Improper Practices That Affect Elections—Mentally Incompetent, Etc.] SEC. 4. The Legislature shall prohibit improper practices that affect elections and shall provide for the disqualification of electors while mentally incompetent or imprisoned or on parole for the conviction of a felony. [Former Section 3, as renumbered June 8, 1976.] SEC. 5. [Renumbered Section 6 June 8, 1976. See Section 5, below.] New Article II adopted November 7, 1972. [Voter-Nominated Primary Election—Partisan Elections—Open Presidential Primary— Election Rights of Political Parties] SEC. 5. (a) A voter-nomination primary election shall be conducted to select the candidates for congressional and state elective offices in California. All voters may vote at a voter-nominated primary election for any candidate for congressional and state elective office without regard to the political party preference disclosed by the candidate or the voter, provided that the voter is otherwise qualified to vote for candidates for the office in question. The candidates who are the top two vote-getters at a voter-nominated primary election for a congressional or state elective office shall, regardless of party preference, compete in the ensuing general election. (b) Except as otherwise provided by Section 6, a candidate for a congressional or state elective office may have his or her political party preference, or lack of political party preference, indicated upon the ballot for the office in the manner provided by statute. A political party or party central committee shall not nominate a candidate for any congressional or state elective office at the voter-nominated primary. This subdivision shall not be interpreted to prohibit a political party or party central committee from endorsing, supporting, or opposing any candidate for a congressional or state elective office. A political party or party central committee shall not have the right to have its preferred candidate participate in the general election for a voter-nominated office other than a candidate who is one of the two highest vote-getters at the primary election, as provided in subdivision (a). (c) The Legislature shall provide for partisan elections for presidential candidates, and political party and party central committees, including an open presidential primary whereby the candidates on the ballot are those found by the Secretary of State to be recognized candidates throughout the nation or throughout California for the office of President of the United States, and those whose names are placed on the ballot by petition, but excluding any candidate who has withdrawn by fling an affidavit of non-candidacy. (d) A political party that participated in a primary election for a partisan office pursuant to subdivision (c) has the right to participate in the general election for that office and shall not be denied the ability to place on the general election ballot the candidate who received, at the primary election, the highest vote among that party’s candidates. [As amended June 8, 2010.] [Nonpartisan offices] SEC. 6. (a) All judicial, school, county, and city offices, including the Superintendent of Public Instruction, shall be nonpartisan. (b) A political party or party central committee shall not nominate a candidate for nonpartisan office, and the candidate’s party preference shall not be included on the ballot for the nonpartisan office. [As amended June 8, 2010.] [Voting—Secret] SEC. 7. Voting shall be secret. [Former Section 6, as renumbered June 8, 1976.] [Initiative] SEC. 8. (a) The initiative is the power of the electors to propose statutes and amendments to the Constitution and to adopt or reject them. (b) An initiative measure may be proposed by presenting to the Secretary of State a petition that sets forth the text of the proposed statute or amendment to the Constitution and is certified to have been signed by electors equal in number to 5 percent in the case of a statute, and 8 percent in the case of an amendment to the Constitution, of the votes for all candidates for Governor at the last gubernatorial election. (c) The Secretary of State shall then submit the measure at the next general election held at least 131 days after it qualifies or at any special statewide election held prior to that general election. The Governor may call a special statewide election for the measure. (d) An initiative measure embracing more than one subject may not be submitted to the electors or have any effect. (e) An initiative measure may not include or exclude any political subdivision of the State from the application or effect of its provisions based upon approval or disapproval of the initiative measure, or based upon the casting of a specified percentage of votes in favor of the measure, by the electors of that political subdivision. (f) An initiative measure may not contain alternative or cumulative provisions wherein one or more of those provisions would become law depending upon the casting of a specified percentage of votes for or against the measure. [As amended June 2, 1998.] [Referendum] SEC. 9. (a) The referendum is the power of the electors to approve or reject statutes or parts of statutes except urgency statutes, statutes calling elections, and statutes providing for tax levies or appropriations for usual current expenses of the State. (b) A referendum measure may be proposed by presenting to the Secretary of State, within 90 days after the enactment date of the statute, a petition certified to have been signed by electors equal in number to 5 percent of the votes for all candidates for Governor at the last gubernatorial election, asking that the statute or part of it be submitted to the electors. In the case of a statute enacted by a bill passed by the Legislature on or before the date the Legislature adjourns for a joint recess to reconvene in the second calendar year of the biennium of the legislative session, and in the possession of the Governor after that date, the petition may not be presented on or after January 1 next following the enactment date unless a copy of the petition is submitted to the Attorney General pursuant to subdivision (d) of Section 10 of Article II before January 1. (c) The Secretary of State shall then submit the measure at the next general election held at least 31 days after it qualifies or at a special statewide election held prior to that general election. The Governor may call a special statewide election for the measure. [As amended June 5, 1990.] [Initiative and Referendum—Vote and Effective Date—conflicts—Legislative Repeal or Amendment—Titling] SEC. 10. (a) An initiative statute or referendum approved by a majority of votes cast thereon takes effect on the fifth day after the Secretary of State files the statement of the vote for the election at which the measure is voted on, but the measure may provide that it becomes operative after its effective date. If a referendum petition is fled against a part of a statute, the remainder of the statute shall not be delayed from going into effect. (b) If provisions of two or more measures approved at the same election conflict, the provisions of the measure receiving the highest number of affrmative votes shall prevail. (c) The Legislature may amend or repeal a referendum statute. The Legislature may amend or repeal an initiative statute by another statute that becomes effective only when approved by the electors unless the initiative statute permits amendment or repeal without the electors’ approval. (d) Before circulation of an initiative or referendum petition for signatures, a copy shall be submitted to the Attorney General who shall prepare a title and summary of the measure as provided by law. (e) The Legislature shall provide for the manner in which a petition shall be circulated, presented, and certified, and the manner in which a measure shall be submitted to the electors. [As amended June 5, 2018.] [Initiative and Referendum—Cities or Counties] SEC. 11. (a) Initiative and referendum powers may be exercised by the electors of each city or county under procedures that the Legislature shall provide. Except as provided in subdivisions (b) and (c), this section does not affect a city having a charter. (b) A city or county initiative measure may not include or exclude any part of the city or county from the application or effect of its provisions based upon approval or disapproval of the initiative measure, or based upon the casting of a specified percentage of votes in favor of the measure, by the electors of the city or county or any part thereof. (c) A city or county initiative measure may not contain alternative or cumulative provisions wherein one or more of those provisions would become law depending upon the casting of a specified percentage of votes for or against the measure. [As amended June 2, 1998.] [Naming Individual or Private Corporation to office or Duty Prohibited] SEC. 12. No amendment to the Constitution, and no statute proposed to the electors by the Legislature or by initiative, that names any individual to hold any office, or names or identifies any private corporation to perform any function or to have any power or duty, may be submitted to the electors or have any effect. [Former Section 26 of Article IV, as renumbered June 8, 1976.] [Recall defined] SEC. 13. Recall is the power of the electors to remove an elective officer. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Recall Petitions] SEC. 14. (a) Recall of a state officer is initiated by delivering to the Secretary of State a petition alleging reason for recall. Sufficiency of reason is not reviewable. Proponents have 160 days to file signed petitions. (b) A petition to recall a statewide officer must be signed by electors equal in number to 12 percent of the last vote for the office, with signatures from each of 5 counties equal in number to 1 percent of the last vote for the office in the county. Signatures to recall Senators, members of the Assembly, members of the Board of Equalization, and judges of courts of appeal and trial courts must equal in number 20 percent of the last vote for the office. (c) The Secretary of State shall maintain a continuous count of the signatures certified to that office. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Recall Elections] SEC. 15. (a) An election to determine whether to recall an officer and, if appropriate, to elect a successor shall be called by the Governor and held not less than 60 days nor more than 80 days from the date of certification of sufficient signatures. (b) A recall election may be conducted within 180 days from the date of certification of sufficient signatures in order that the election may be consolidated with the next regularly scheduled election occurring wholly or partially within the same jurisdiction in which the recall election is held, if the number of voters eligible to vote at that next regularly scheduled election equal at least 50 percent of all the voters eligible to vote at the recall election. (c) If the majority vote on the question is to recall, the officer is removed and, if there is a candidate, the candidate who receives a plurality is the successor. The officer may not be a candidate, nor shall there be any candidacy for an office filled pursuant to subdivision (d) of Section 16 of Article VI. [As amended November 8, 1994.] [Legislature to Provide for Petitions, Etc.] SEC. 16. The Legislature shall provide for circulation, fling, and certification of petitions, nomination of candidates, and the recall election. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Recall of Governor or Secretary of State] SEC. 17. If recall of the Governor or Secretary of State is initiated, the recall duties of that office shall be performed by the Lieutenant Governor or Controller, respectively. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Reimbursement of Recall Election Expenses] SEC. 18. A state officer who is not recalled shall be reimbursed by the State for the officer’s recall election expenses legally and personally incurred. Another recall may not be initiated against the officer until six months after the election. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Recall of Local officers] SEC. 19. The Legislature shall provide for recall of local officers. This section does not affect counties and cities whose charters provide for recall. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Terms of Elective offices] SEC. 20. Terms of elective offices provided for by this Constitution, other than Members of the Legislature, commence on the Monday after January 1 following election. The election shall be held in the last even-numbered year before the term expires. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] ARTICLE III. [Repealed November 7, 1972. See Article III, below.] ARTICLE III * STATE OF CALIFORNIA [United States Constitution Supreme Law] SECTION 1. The State of California is an inseparable part of the United States of America, and the United States Constitution is the supreme law of the land. [New section adopted November 7, 1972.] * New Article III adopted November 7, 1972. [Boundaries of the State—Sacramento Seat of Government] SEC. 2. The boundaries of the State are those stated in the Constitution of 1849 as modified pursuant to statute. Sacramento is the capital of California. [New section adopted November 7, 1972.] [Separation of Powers] SEC. 3. The powers of state government are legislative, executive, and judicial. Persons charged with the exercise of one power may not exercise either of the others except as permitted by this Constitution. [New section adopted November 7, 1972.] [Administrative Agencies: Declaration Statute Unenforceable or Unconstitutional Prohibited] SEC. 3.5. An administrative agency, including an administrative agency created by the Constitution or an initiative statute, has no power: (a) To declare a statute unenforceable, or refuse to enforce a statute, on the basis of it being unconstitutional unless an appellate court has made a determination that such statute is unconstitutional; (b) To declare a statute unconstitutional; (c) To declare a statute unenforceable, or to refuse to enforce a statute on the basis that federal law or federal regulations prohibit the enforcement of such statute unless an appellate court has made a determination that the enforcement of such statute is prohibited by federal law or federal regulations. [New section adopted June 6, 1978.] [Salaries of Elected State officers—Salaries of Judges] SEC. 4. (a) Except as provided in subdivision (b), salaries of elected state officers may not be reduced during their term of office. Laws that set these salaries are appropriations. (b) Beginning on January 1, 1981, the base salary of a judge of a court of record shall equal the annual salary payable as of July 1, 1980, for that office had the judge been elected in 1978. The Legislature may prescribe increases in those salaries during a term of office, and it may terminate prospective increases in those salaries at any time during a term of office, but it shall not reduce the salary of a judge during a term of office below the highest level paid during that term of office. Laws setting the salaries of judges shall not constitute an obligation of contract pursuant to Section 9 of Article I or any other provision of law. [As amended November 4, 1980.] [Suits Against State] SEC. 5. Suits may be brought against the State in such manner and in such courts as shall be directed by law. [New section adopted November 7, 1972.] [official State Language] SEC. 6. (a) Purpose. English is the common language of the people of the United States of America and the State of California. This section is intended to preserve, protect and strengthen the English language, and not to supersede any of the rights guaranteed to the people by this Constitution. (b) English as the official Language of California. English is the official language of the State of California. (c) Enforcement. The Legislature shall enforce this section by appropriate legislation. The Legislature and officials of the State of California shall take all steps necessary to insure that the role of English as the common language of the State of California is preserved and enhanced. The Legislature shall make no law which diminishes or ignores the role of English as the common language of the State of California. (d) Personal Right of Action and Jurisdiction of Courts. Any person who is a resident of or doing business in the State of California shall have standing to sue the State of California to enforce this section, and the Courts of record of the State of California shall have jurisdiction to hear cases brought to enforce this section. The Legislature may provide reasonable and appropriate limitations on the time and manner of suits brought under this section. [New section adopted November 4, 1986. Initiative measure.] [Retirement benefits for Elected Constitutional officers] SEC. 7. (a) The retirement allowance for any person, all of whose credited service in the Legislators’ Retirement System was rendered or was deemed to have been rendered as an elective officer of the State whose office is provided for by the California Constitution, other than a judge and other than a Member of the Senate or Assembly, and all or any part of whose retirement allowance is calculated on the basis of the compensation payable to the officer holding the office which the member last held prior to retirement, or for the survivor or beneficiary of such a person, shall not be increased or affected in any manner by changes on or after November 5, 1986, in the compensation payable to the officer holding the office which the member last held prior to retirement. (b) This section shall apply to any person, survivor, or beneficiary described in subdivision (a) who receives, or is receiving, from the Legislators’ Retirement System a retirement allowance on or after November 5, 1986, all or any part of which allowance is calculated on the basis of the compensation payable to the officer holding the office which the member last held prior to retirement. (c) It is the intent of the people, in adopting this section, to restrict retirement allowances to amounts reasonably to be expected by certain members and retired members of the Legislators’ Retirement System and to preserve the basic character of earned retirement benefits while prohibiting windfalls and unforeseen advantages which have no relation to the real theory and objective of a sound retirement system. It is not the intent of this section to deny any member, retired member, survivor, or beneficiary a reasonable retirement allowance. Thus, this section shall not be construed as a repudiation of a debt nor the impairment of a contract for a substantial and reasonable retirement allowance from the Legislators’ Retirement System. (d) The people and the Legislature hereby find and declare that the dramatic increase in the retirement allowances of persons described in subdivision (a) which would otherwise result when the compensation for those offices increases on November 5, 1986, or January 5, 1987, are not benefits which could have reasonably been expected. The people and the Legislature further find and declare that the Legislature did not intend to provide in its scheme of compensation for those offices such windfall benefits. [New section adopted November 4, 1986.] [California Citizens Compensation Commission] SEC. 8. (a) The California Citizens Compensation Commission is hereby created and shall consist of seven members appointed by the Governor. The commission shall establish the annual salary and the medical, dental, insurance, and other similar benefits of state officers. (b) The commission shall consist of the following persons: (1) Three public members, one of whom has expertise in the area of compensation, such as an economist, market researcher, or personnel man-ager; one of whom is a member of a nonprofit public interest organization; and one of whom is representative of the general population and may include, among others, a retiree, homemaker, or person of median income. No person appointed pursuant to this paragraph may, during the 12 months prior to his or her appointment, have held public office, either elective or appointive, have been a candidate for elective public office, or have been a lobbyist, as defined by the Political Reform Act of 1974. (2) Two members who have experience in the business community, one of whom is an executive of a corporation incorporated in this State which ranks among the largest private sector employers in the State based on the number of employees employed by the corporation in this State and one of whom is an owner of a small business in this State. (3) Two members, each of whom is an officer or member of a labor organization. (c) The Governor shall strive insofar as practicable to provide a balanced representation of the geographic, gender, racial, and ethnic diversity of the State in appointing commission members. (d) The Governor shall appoint commission members and designate a chairperson for the commission not later than 30 days after the effective date of this section. The terms of two of the initial appointees shall expire on December 31, 1992, two on December 31, 1994, and three on December 31, 1996, as determined by the Governor. Thereafter, the term of each member shall be six years. Within 15 days of any vacancy, the Governor shall appoint a person to serve the unexpired portion of the term. (e) No current or former officer or employee of this State is eligible for appointment to the commission. (f) Public notice shall be given of all meetings of the commission, and the meetings shall be open to the public. (g) On or before December 3, 1990, the commission shall, by a single resolution adopted by a majority of the membership of the commission, establish the annual salary and the medical, dental, insurance, and other similar benefits of state officers. The annual salary and benefits specified in that resolution shall be effective on and after December 3, 1990. Thereafter, at or before the end of each fiscal year, the commission shall, by a resolution adopted by a majority of the membership of the commission, adjust the medical, dental, insurance, and other similar benefits of state officers. The benefits specified in the resolution shall be effective on and after the first Monday of the next December. Thereafter, at or before the end of each fiscal year, the commission shall adjust the annual salary of state officers by a resolution adopted by a majority of the membership of the commission. The annual salary specified in the resolution shall be effective on and after the first Monday of the next December, except that a resolution shall not be adopted or take effect in any year that increases the annual salary of any state officer if, on or before the immediately preceding June 1, the Director of Finance certifies to the commission, based on estimates for the current fiscal year, that there will be a negative balance on June 30 of the current fiscal year in the Special Fund for Economic Uncertainties in an amount equal to, or greater than, 1 percent of estimated General Fund revenues. (h) In establishing or adjusting the annual salary and the medical, dental, insurance, and other similar benefits, the commission shall consider all of the following: (1) The amount of time directly or indirectly related to the performance of the duties, functions, and services of a state officer. (2) The amount of the annual salary and the medical, dental, insurance, and other similar benefits for other elected and appointed officers and offcials in this State with comparable responsibilities, the judiciary, and, to the extent practicable, the private sector, recognizing, however, that state officers do not receive, and do not expect to receive, compensation at the same levels as individuals in the private sector with comparable experience and responsibilities. (3) The responsibility and scope of authority of the entity in which the state officer serves. (4) Whether the Director of Finance estimates that there will be a negative balance in the Special Fund for Economic Uncertainties in an amount equal to or greater than 1 percent of estimated General Fund revenues in the current fiscal year. (i) Until a resolution establishing or adjusting the annual salary and the medical, dental, insurance, and other similar benefits for state officers takes effect, each state officer shall continue to receive the same annual salary and the medical, dental, insurance, and other similar benefits received previously. (j) All commission members shall receive their actual and necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the performance of their duties. Each member shall be compensated at the same rate as members, other than the chairperson, of the Fair Political Practices Commission, or its successor, for each day engaged in official duties, not to exceed 45 days per year. (k) It is the intent of the Legislature that the creation of the commission should not generate new state costs for staff and services. The Department of Personnel Administration, the Board of Administration of the Public Employees’ Retirement System, or other appropriate agencies, or their successors, shall furnish, from existing resources, staff and services to the commission as needed for the performance of its duties. (l) “State officer,” as used in this section, means the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Attorney General, Controller, Insurance Commissioner, Secretary of State, Superintendent of Public Instruction, Treasurer, member of the State Board of Equalization, and Member of the Legislature. [As amended May 19, 2009.] [Sale of Surplus State Property] SEC. 9. The proceeds from the sale of surplus state property occurring on or after the effective date of this section, and any proceeds from the previous sale of surplus state property that have not been expended or encumbered as of that date, shall be used to pay the principal and interest on bonds issued pursuant to the Economic Recovery Bond Act authorized at the March 2, 2004, statewide primary election. Once the principal and interest on those bonds are fully paid, the proceeds from the sale of surplus state property shall be deposited into the Special Fund for Economic Uncertainties, or any successor fund. For purposes of this section, surplus state property does not include property purchased with revenues described in Article XIX or any other special fund moneys. [New section adopted November 2, 2004.] ARTICLE IV LEGISLATIVE [Heading as amended November 8, 1966.] SECTION 1. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 1, below.] [Legislative Power] SECTION 1. The legislative power of this State is vested in the California Legislature which consists of the Senate and Assembly, but the people reserve to themselves the powers of initiative and referendum. [New section adopted November 8, 1966.] SEC. 1a. [Renumbered Section 20 of Article XIII and amended November 8, 1966.] SEC. 1b. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 1c. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 1d. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] [Legislators—Limitation on Incumbency—Restriction of Retirement benefits—Limitation of Staff and Support Services—Number of Terms] SEC. 1.5. The people find and declare that the Founding Fathers established a system of representative government based upon free, fair, and competitive elections. The increased concentration of political power in the hands of incumbent representatives has made our electoral system less free, less competitive, and less representative. The ability of legislators to serve unlimited number of terms, to establish their own retirement system, and to pay for staff and support services at state expense contribute heavily to the extremely high number of incumbents who are reelected. These unfair incumbent advantages discourage qualified candidates from seeking public office and create a class of career politicians, instead of the citizen representatives envisioned by the Founding Fathers. These career politicians become representatives of the bureaucracy, rather than of the people whom they are elected to represent. To restore a free and democratic system of fair elections, and to encourage qualified candidates to seek public office, the people find and declare that the powers of incumbency must be limited. Retirement benefits must be restricted, state-financed incumbent staff and support services limited, and limitations placed upon the number of terms which may be served. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Senate and Assembly—Membership—Elections—Number of Terms and Years of Service—Qualifications—Vacancies] SEC. 2. (a) (1) The Senate has a membership of 40 Senators elected for 4-year terms, 20 to begin every 2 years. (2) The Assembly has a membership of 80 members elected for 2-year terms. (3) The terms of a Senator or a Member of the Assembly shall commence on the first Monday in December next following her or his election. (4) During her or his lifetime a person may serve no more than 12 years in the Senate, the Assembly, or both, in any combination of terms. This subdivision shall apply only to those Members of the Senate or the Assembly who are first elected to the Legislature after the effective date of this subdivision and who have not previously served in the Senate or Assembly. Members of the Senate or Assembly who were elected before the effective date of this subdivision may serve only the number of terms allowed at the time of the last election before the effective date of this subdivision. (b) Election of members of the Assembly shall be on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of even-numbered years unless otherwise prescribed by the Legislature. Senators shall be elected at the same time and places as members of the Assembly. (c) A person is ineligible to be a member of the Legislature unless the person is an elector and has been a resident of the legislative district for one year, and a citizen of the United States and a resident of California for 3 years, immediately preceding the election, and service of the full term of office to which the person is seeking to be elected would not exceed the maximum years of service permitted by subdivision (a) of this section. (d) When a vacancy occurs in the Legislature the Governor immediately shall call an election to fill the vacancy. [As amended June 5, 2012. Initiative measure.] [Legislative Sessions—Regular and Special Sessions] SEC. 3. (a) The Legislature shall convene in regular session at noon on the first Monday in December of each even-numbered year and each house shall immediately organize. Each session of the Legislature shall adjourn sine die by operation of the Constitution at midnight on November 30 of the following even-numbered year. (b) On extraordinary occasions the Governor by proclamation may cause the Legislature to assemble in special session. When so assembled it has power to legislate only on subjects specified in the proclamation but may provide for expenses and other matters incidental to the session. [As amended June 8, 1976.] [Legislators—conflict of Interest—Prohibited Compensation—Earned Income] SEC. 4. (a) To eliminate any appearance of a conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties and responsibilities, no Member of the Legislature may knowingly receive any salary, wages, commissions, or other similar earned income from a lobbyist or lobbying firm, as defined by the Political Reform Act of 1974, or from a person who, during the previous 12 months, has been under a contract with the Legislature. The Legislature shall enact laws that define earned income. However, earned income does not include any community property interest in the income of a spouse. Any Member who knowingly receives any salary, wages, commissions, or other similar earned income from a lobbyist employer, as defined by the Political Reform Act of 1974, may not, for a period of one year following its receipt, vote upon or make, participate in making, or in any way attempt to use his or her official position to influence an action or decision before the Legislature, other than an action or decision involving a bill described in subdivision (c) of Section 12 of this article, which he or she knows, or has reason to know, would have a direct and significant financial impact on the lobbyist employer and would not impact the public generally or a significant segment of the public in a similar manner. As used in this subdivision, “public generally” includes an industry, trade, or profession. [Legislators—Travel and Living Expenses] (b) Travel and living expenses for Members of the Legislature in connection with their official duties shall be prescribed by statute passed by roll call vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership of each house concurring. A Member may not receive travel and living expenses during the times that the Legislature is in recess for more than three calendar days, unless the Member is traveling to or from, or is in attendance at, any meeting of a committee of which he or she is a member, or a meeting, conference, or other legislative function or responsibility as authorized by the rules of the house of which he or she is a member, which is held at a location at least 20 miles from his or her place of residence. [Legislators—Retirement] (c) The Legislature may not provide retirement benefits based on any portion of a monthly salary in excess of five hundred dollars ($500) paid to any Member of the Legislature unless the Member receives the greater amount while serving as a Member in the Legislature. The Legislature may, prior to their retirement, limit the retirement benefits payable to Members of the Legislature who serve during or after the term commencing in 1967. When computing the retirement allowance of a Member who serves in the Legislature during the term commencing in 1967 or later, allowance may be made for increases in cost of living if so provided by statute, but only with respect to increases in the cost of living occurring after retirement of the Member. However, the Legislature may provide that no Member shall be deprived of a cost of living adjustment based on a monthly salary of five hundred dollars ($500) which has accrued prior to the commencement of the 1967 Regular Session of the Legislature. [As amended June 5, 1990.] [Legislators—Retirement] SEC. 4.5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution or existing law, a person elected to or serving in the Legislature on or after November 1, 1990, shall participate in the Federal Social Security (Retire-ment, Disability, Health Insurance) Program and the State shall pay only the employer’s share of the contribution necessary to such participation. No other pension or retirement benefit shall accrue as a result of service in the Legislature, such service not being intended as a career occupation. This Section shall not be construed to abrogate or diminish any vested pension or retirement benefit which may have accrued under an existing law to a person holding or having held office in the Legislature, but upon adoption of this Act no further entitlement to nor vesting in any existing program shall accrue to any such person, other than Social Security to the extent herein provided. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Legislators—Qualifcations—Expulsion and Suspension] SEC. 5. (a) (1) Each house of the Legislature shall judge the qualif-cations and elections of its Members and, by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring, may expel a Member. (2) (A) Each house may suspend a Member by motion or resolution ad-opted by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring. The motion or resolution shall contain findings and declara-tions setting forth the basis for the suspension. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, the house may deem the salary and benefits of the Member to be forfeited for all or part of the period of the suspension by express provision of the motion or resolution. (B) A Member suspended pursuant to this paragraph shall not exercise any of the rights, privileges, duties, or powers of his or her office, or utilize any resources of the Legislature, during the period the suspension is in ef-fect. (C) The suspension of a Member pursuant to this paragraph shall re-main in effect until the date specified in the motion or resolution or, if no date is specified, the date a subsequent motion or resolution terminating the suspension is adopted by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership of the house concurring. [Legislators—Honoraria] (b) No Member of the Legislature may accept any honorarium. The Legislature shall enact laws that implement this subdivision. [Legislators—Gifts—conflict of Interest] (c) The Legislature shall enact laws that ban or strictly limit the accep-tance of a gift by a Member of the Legislature from any source if the ac-ceptance of the gift might create a conflict of interest. [Legislators—Prohibited Compensation or Activity] (d) No Member of the Legislature may knowingly accept any compensation for appearing, agreeing to appear, or taking any other action on behalf of another person before any state government board or agency. If a Member knowingly accepts any compensation for appearing, agreeing to appear, or taking any other action on behalf of another person before any local government board or agency, the Member may not, for a period of one year following the acceptance of the compensation, vote upon or make, participate in making, or in any way attempt to use his or her official position to infuence an action or decision before the Legislature, other than an action or decision involving a bill described in subdivision (c) of Section 12, which he or she knows, or has reason to know, would have a direct and signifcant fnancial impact on that person and would not impact the public generally or a signifcant segment of the public in a similar manner. As used in this subdivision, “public generally” includes an industry, trade, or profession. However, a Member may engage in activities involving a board or agency which are strictly on his or her own behalf, appear in the capacity of an attorney before any court or the Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board, or act as an advocate without compensation or make an inquiry for information on behalf of a person before a board or agency. This subdivision does not prohibit any action of a partnership or frm of which the Member is a member if the Member does not share directly or indirectly in the fee, less any expenses attributable to that fee, resulting from that action. [Legislators—Lobbying] (e) The Legislature shall enact laws that prohibit a Member of the Legislature whose term of office commences on or after December 3, 1990, from lobbying, for compensation, as governed by the Political Reform Act of 1974, before the Legislature for 12 months after leaving office. [Legislators—conflict of Interest] (f) The Legislature shall enact new laws, and strengthen the enforcement of existing laws, prohibiting Members of the Legislature from engaging in activities or having interests which conflict with the proper discharge of their duties and responsibilities. However, the people reserve to themselves the power to implement this requirement pursuant to Article II. [As amended June 7, 2016.] SEC. 6. [Repealed June 3, 1980. See Section 6, below.] [Senatorial and Assembly Districts] SEC. 6. For the purpose of choosing members of the Legislature, the State shall be divided into 40 Senatorial and 80 Assembly districts to be called Senatorial and Assembly Districts. Each Senatorial district shall choose one Senator and each Assembly district shall choose one member of the Assembly. [New section adopted June 3, 1980.] [House Rules—officers—Quorum] SEC. 7. (a) Each house shall choose its officers and adopt rules for its proceedings. A majority of the membership constitutes a quorum, but a smaller number may recess from day to day and compel the attendance of absent members. [Journals] (b) Each house shall keep and publish a journal of its proceedings. The rollcall vote of the members on a question shall be taken and entered in the journal at the request of 3 members present. [Public Proceedings—Closed Sessions—Audiovisual Recordings] (c) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (3), the proceedings of each house and the committees thereof shall be open and public. The right to attend open and public proceedings includes the right of any person to re-cord by audio or video means any and all parts of the proceedings and to broadcast or otherwise transmit them; provided that the Legislature may adopt reasonable rules pursuant to paragraph (5) regulating the placement and use of the equipment for recording or broadcasting the proceedings for the sole purpose of minimizing disruption of the proceedings. Any ag-grieved party shall have standing to challenge said rules in an action for declaratory and injunctive relief, and the Legislature shall have the burden of demonstrating that the rule is reasonable. (2) Commencing on January 1 of the second calendar year following the adoption of this paragraph, the Legislature shall also cause audiovisual re-cordings to be made of all proceedings subject to paragraph (1) in their entirety, shall make such recordings public through the Internet within 24 hours after the proceedings have been recessed or adjourned for the day, and shall maintain an archive of said recordings, which shall be accessible to the public through the Internet and downloadable for a period of no less than 20 years as specified by statute. (3) Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2), closed sessions may be held solely for any of the following purposes: (A) To consider the appointment, employment, evaluation of performance, or dismissal of a public officer or employee, to consider or hear complaints or charges brought against a Member of the Legislature or other public officer or employee, or to establish the classifcation or com-pensation of an employee of the Legislature. (B) To consider matters affecting the safety and security of Members of the Legislature or its employees or the safety and security of any buildings and grounds used by the Legislature. (C) To confer with, or receive advice from, its legal counsel regarding pending or reasonably anticipated, or whether to initiate, litigation when discussion in open session would not protect the interests of the house or committee regarding the litigation. (4) A caucus of the Members of the Senate, the Members of the Assembly, or the Members of both houses, which is composed of the members of the same political party, may meet in closed session. (5) The Legislature shall implement this subdivision by concurrent resolution adopted by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership of each house concurring, or by statute, and in the case of a closed session held pursuant to paragraph (3), shall prescribe that reason-able notice of the closed session and the purpose of the closed session shall be provided to the public. If there is a conflict between a concurrent resolution and statute, the last adopted or enacted shall prevail. [Recess] (d) Neither house without the consent of the other may recess for more than 10 days or to any other place. [As amended November 8, 2016. Initiative measure.] [Legislature—Total Aggregate Expenditures] SEC. 7.5. In the fiscal year immediately following the adoption of this Act, the total aggregate expenditures of the Legislature for the compensa-tion of members and employees of, and the operating expenses and equip-ment for, the Legislature may not exceed an amount equal to nine hundred ffty thousand dollars ($950,000) per member for that fiscal year or 80 percent of the amount of money expended for those purposes in the pre-ceding fiscal year, whichever is less. For each fiscal year thereafter, the total aggregate expenditures may not exceed an amount equal to that ex-pended for those purposes in the preceding fiscal year, adjusted and com-pounded by an amount equal to the percentage increase in the appropria-tions limit for the State established pursuant to Article XIII B. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Bills and Statutes—30-day Waiting Period] SEC. 8. (a) At regular sessions no bill other than the budget bill may be heard or acted on by committee or either house until the 31st day after the bill is introduced unless the house dispenses with this requirement by rollcall vote entered in the journal, three fourths of the membership con-curring. [Bills and Statutes—3 Readings — Notice Period] (b) (1) The Legislature may make no law except by statute and may en-act no statute except by bill. No bill may be passed unless it is read by title on 3 days in each house except that the house may dispense with this re-quirement by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two thirds of the member-ship concurring. (2) No bill may be passed or ultimately become a statute unless the bill with any amendments has been printed, distributed to the members, and published on the Internet, in its fnal form, for at least 72 hours before the vote, except that this notice period may be waived if the Governor has sub-mitted to the Legislature a written statement that dispensing with this no-tice period for that bill is necessary to address a state of emergency, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (c) of Section 3 of Article XIII B, that has been declared by the Governor, and the house considering the bill thereafter dispenses with the notice period for that bill by a separate rollcall vote entered in the journal, two thirds of the membership concurring, prior to the vote on the bill. (3) No bill may be passed unless, by rollcall vote entered in the journal, a majority of the membership of each house concurs. [Bills and Statutes—Effective Date] (c) (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subdivision, a statute enacted at a regular session shall go into effect on January 1 next following a 90-day period from the date of enactment of the statute and a statute enacted at a special session shall go into effect on the 91st day after adjournment of the special session at which the bill was passed. (2) A statute, other than a statute establishing or changing boundaries of any legislative, congressional, or other election district, enacted by a bill passed by the Legislature on or before the date the Legislature ad-journs for a joint recess to reconvene in the second calendar year of the biennium of the legislative session, and in the possession of the Governor after that date, shall go into effect on January 1 next following the enact-ment date of the statute unless, before January 1, a copy of a referendum petition affecting the statute is submitted to the Attorney General pursuant to subdivision (d) of Section 10 of Article II, in which event the statute shall go into effect on the 91st day after the enactment date unless the pe-tition has been presented to the Secretary of State pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 9 of Article II. (3) Statutes calling elections, statutes providing for tax levies or appro-priations for the usual current expenses of the State, and urgency statutes shall go into effect immediately upon their enactment. [Bills and Statutes—Urgency Statutes] (d) Urgency statutes are those necessary for immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety. A statement of facts constituting the ne-cessity shall be set forth in one section of the bill. In each house the section and the bill shall be passed separately, each by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two thirds of the membership concurring. An urgency statute may not create or abolish any office or change the salary, term, or duties of any office, or grant any franchise or special privilege, or create any vested right or interest. [As amended November 8, 2016. Initiative measure.] [Ballot Measures—Application] SEC. 8.5. An act amending an initiative statute, an act providing for the issuance of bonds, or a constitutional amendment proposed by the Legis-lature and submitted to the voters for approval may not do either of the following: (a) Include or exclude any political subdivision of the State from the application or effect of its provisions based upon approval or disapproval of the measure, or based upon the casting of a specified percentage of votes in favor of the measure, by the electors of that political subdivision. (b) Contain alternative or cumulative provisions wherein one or more of those provisions would become law depending upon the casting of a spec-ifed percentage of votes for or against the measure. [New section adopted June 2, 1998.] SEC. 9. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 9, below.] [Statutes—Title—Section] SEC. 9. A statute shall embrace but one subject, which shall be ex-pressed in its title. If a statute embraces a subject not expressed in its title, only the part not expressed is void. A statute may not be amended by ref-erence to its title. A section of a statute may not be amended unless the sec-tion is re-enacted as amended. [New section adopted November 8, 1966.] [Governor’s Veto—Bill Introduction in Biennial Session—Fiscal Emergencies] SEC. 10. (a) Each bill passed by the Legislature shall be presented to the Governor. It becomes a statute if it is signed by the Governor. The Gov-ernor may veto it by returning it with any objections to the house of origin, which shall enter the objections in the journal and proceed to reconsider it. If each house then passes the bill by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring, it becomes a statute. (b) (1) Any bill, other than a bill which would establish or change boundaries of any legislative, congressional, or other election district, passed by the Legislature on or before the date the Legislature adjourns for a joint recess to reconvene in the second calendar year of the biennium of the legislative session, and in the possession of the Governor after that date, that is not returned within 30 days after that date becomes a statute. (2) Any bill passed by the Legislature before September 1 of the second calendar year of the biennium of the legislative session and in the posses-sion of the Governor on or after September 1 that is not returned on or be-fore September 30 of that year becomes a statute. (3) Any other bill presented to the Governor that is not returned within 12 days becomes a statute. (4) If the Legislature by adjournment of a special session prevents the return of a bill with the veto message, the bill becomes a statute unless the Governor vetoes the bill within 12 days after it is presented by depositing it and the veto message in the office of the Secretary of State. (5) If the 12th day of the period within which the Governor is required to perform an act pursuant to paragraph (3) or (4) of this subdivision is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the period is extended to the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday. (c) Any bill introduced during the first year of the biennium of the leg-islative session that has not been passed by the house of origin by January 31 of the second calendar year of the biennium may no longer be acted on by the house. No bill may be passed by either house on or after September 1 of an even-numbered year except statutes calling elections, statutes pro-viding for tax levies or appropriations for the usual current expenses of the State, and urgency statutes, and bills passed after being vetoed by the Gov-ernor. (d) The Legislature may not present any bill to the Governor after No-vember 15 of the second calendar year of the biennium of the legislative session. (e) The Governor may reduce or eliminate one or more items of appro-priation while approving other portions of a bill. The Governor shall ap-pend to the bill a statement of the items reduced or eliminated with the reasons for the action. The Governor shall transmit to the house originat-ing the bill a copy of the statement and reasons. Items reduced or elimi-nated shall be separately reconsidered and may be passed over the Gover-nor’s veto in the same manner as bills. (f) (1) If, following the enactment of the budget bill for the 2004–05 fiscal year or any subsequent fiscal year, the Governor determines that, for that fiscal year, General Fund revenues will decline substantially below the estimate of General Fund revenues upon which the budget bill for that fs-cal year, as enacted, was based, or General Fund expenditures will in-crease substantially above that estimate of General Fund revenues, or both, the Governor may issue a proclamation declaring a fiscal emergency and shall thereupon cause the Legislature to assemble in special session for this purpose. The proclamation shall identify the nature of the fiscal emer-gency and shall be submitted by the Governor to the Legislature, accom-panied by proposed legislation to address the fiscal emergency. (2) If the Legislature fails to pass and send to the Governor a bill or bills to address the fiscal emergency by the 45th day following the issuance of the proclamation, the Legislature may not act on any other bill, nor may the Legislature adjourn for a joint recess, until that bill or those bills have been passed and sent to the Governor. (3) A bill addressing the fiscal emergency declared pursuant to this sec-tion shall contain a statement to that effect. [As amended March 2, 2004.] [Committees] SEC. 11. The Legislature or either house may by resolution provide for the selection of committees necessary for the conduct of its business, in-cluding committees to ascertain facts and make recommendations to the Legislature on a subject within the scope of legislative control. [As amend-ed November 7, 1972.] [Governor’s Budget—Budget Bill—Other Appropriations] SEC. 12. (a) Within the first 10 days of each calendar year, the Gover-nor shall submit to the Legislature, with an explanatory message, a budget for the ensuing fiscal year containing itemized statements for recommend-ed state expenditures and estimated state revenues. If recommended ex-penditures exceed estimated revenues, the Governor shall recommend the sources from which the additional revenues should be provided. (b) The Governor and the Governor-elect may require a state agency, officer or employee to furnish whatever information is deemed necessary to prepare the budget. (c) (1) The budget shall be accompanied by a budget bill itemizing rec-ommended expenditures. (2) The budget bill shall be introduced immediately in each house by the persons chairing the committees that consider the budget. (3) The Legislature shall pass the budget bill by midnight on June 15 of each year. (4) Until the budget bill has been enacted, the Legislature shall not send to the Governor for consideration any bill appropriating funds for expen-diture during the fiscal year for which the budget bill is to be enacted, ex-cept emergency bills recommended by the Governor or appropriations for the salaries and expenses of the Legislature. (d) No bill except the budget bill may contain more than one item of ap-propriation, and that for one certain, expressed purpose. Appropriations from the General Fund of the State, except appropriations for the public schools and appropriations in the budget bill and in other bills providing for appropriations related to the budget bill, are void unless passed in each house by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring. (e) (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law or of this Constitu-tion, the budget bill and other bills providing for appropriations related to the budget bill may be passed in each house by rollcall vote entered in the journal, a majority of the membership concurring, to take effect immedi-ately upon being signed by the Governor or upon a date specified in the legislation. Nothing in this subdivision shall affect the vote requirement for appropriations for the public schools contained in subdivision (d) of this section and in subdivision (b) of Section 8 of this article. (2) For purposes of this section, “other bills providing for appropria-tions related to the budget bill’’ shall consist only of bills identifed as re-lated to the budget in the budget bill passed by the Legislature. (f) The Legislature may control the submission, approval, and enforce-ment of budgets and the fling of claims for all state agencies. (g) For the 2004–05 fiscal year, or any subsequent fiscal year, the Leg-islature may not send to the Governor for consideration, nor may the Gov-ernor sign into law, a budget bill that would appropriate from the General Fund, for that fiscal year, a total amount that, when combined with all ap-propriations from the General Fund for that fiscal year made as of the date of the budget bill’s passage, and the amount of any General Fund moneys transferred to the Budget Stabilization Account for that fiscal year pursu-ant to Section 20 of Article XVI, exceeds General Fund revenues for that fiscal year estimated as of the date of the budget bill’s passage. That esti-mate of General Fund revenues shall be set forth in the budget bill passed by the Legislature. (h) Notwithstanding any other provision of law or of this Constitution, including subdivision (c) of this section, Section 4 of this article, and Sec-tions 4 and 8 of Article III, in any year in which the budget bill is not passed by the Legislature by midnight on June 15, there shall be no appro-priation from the current budget or future budget to pay any salary or re-imbursement for travel or living expenses for Members of the Legislature during any regular or special session for the period from midnight on June 15 until the day that the budget bill is presented to the Governor. No salary or reimbursement for travel or living expenses forfeited pursuant to this subdivision shall be paid retroactively. [As amended November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [General Fund—Revenues and Expenditures—Estimates] SEC. 12.5. Within 10 days following the submission of a budget pursu-ant to subdivision (a) of Section 12, following the proposed adjustments to the Governor’s Budget required by subdivision (e) of Section 13308 of the Government Code or a successor statute, and following the enactment of the budget bill, or as soon as feasible thereafter, the Director of Finance shall submit to the Legislature both of the following: (a) Estimates of General Fund revenues for the ensuing fiscal year and for the three fiscal years thereafter. (b) Estimates of General Fund expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year and for the three fiscal years thereafter. [New section adopted November 4, 2014.] [Legislators—Ineligible for Certain offices] SEC. 13. A member of the Legislature may not, during the term for which the member is elected, hold any office or employment under the State other than an elective office. [As amended November 5, 1974.] SEC. 14. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 14, below.] [Members—Not Subject to Civil Process] SEC. 14. A member of the Legislature is not subject to civil process during a session of the Legislature or for 5 days before and after a session. [New section adopted November 8, 1966.] [Infuencing Action or Vote of a Member—Felony] SEC. 15. A person who seeks to infuence the vote or action of a member of the Legislature in the member’s legislative capacity by bribery, promise of reward, intimidation, or other dishonest means, or a member of the Legislature so infuenced, is guilty of a felony. [As amended November 5, 1974.] [Uniform Operation of General Laws—Special Statute—Invalid] SEC. 16. (a) All laws of a general nature have uniform operation. (b) A local or special statute is invalid in any case if a general statute can be made applicable. [As amended November 5, 1974.] SEC. 17. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 17, below.] [Grant of Extra Compensation or Allowance Prohibited] SEC. 17. The Legislature has no power to grant, or to authorize a city, county, or other public body to grant, extra compensation or extra allowance to a public officer, public employee, or contractor after service has been rendered or a contract has been entered into and performed in whole or in part, or to authorize the payment of a claim against the State or a city, county, or other public body under an agreement made without authority of law. [New section adopted November 8, 1966.] SEC. 18. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 18, below.] [Impeachment] SEC. 18. (a) The Assembly has the sole power of impeachment. Impeachments shall be tried by the Senate. A person may not be convicted unless, by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two thirds of the membership of the Senate concurs. (b) State officers elected on a statewide basis, members of the State Board of Equalization, and judges of state courts are subject to impeachment for misconduct in office. Judgment may extend only to removal from office and disqualifcation to hold any office under the State, but the person convicted or acquitted remains subject to criminal punishment according to law. [New section adopted November 8, 1966.] [Lotteries—Horse Races Regulated—Bingo Games and Raffes for Charitable Purposes—Gaming on Tribal Lands] SEC. 19. (a) The Legislature has no power to authorize lotteries and shall prohibit the sale of lottery tickets in the State. (b) The Legislature may provide for the regulation of horse races and horse race meetings and wagering on the results. (c) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), the Legislature by statute may au-thorize cities and counties to provide for bingo games, but only for chari-table purposes. (d) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), there is authorized the establish-ment of a California State Lottery. (e) The Legislature has no power to authorize, and shall prohibit, casi-nos of the type currently operating in Nevada and New Jersey. (f)* Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and (e), and any other provision of state law, the Governor is authorized to negotiate and conclude com-pacts, subject to ratifcation by the Legislature, for the operation of slot machines and for the conduct of lottery games and banking and percentage card games by federally recognized Indian tribes on Indian lands in Cali-fornia in accordance with federal law. Accordingly, slot machines, lottery games, and banking and percentage card games are hereby permitted to be conducted and operated on tribal lands subject to those compacts. (f)† Notwithstanding subdivision (a), the Legislature may authorize pri-vate, nonprofit, eligible organizations, as defined by the Legislature, to conduct raffes as a funding mechanism to provide support for their own or another private, nonprofit, eligible organization’s benefcial and chari-table works, provided that (1) at least 90 percent of the gross receipts from the raffe go directly to benefcial or charitable purposes in California, and (2) any person who receives compensation in connection with the opera-tion of a raffe is an employee of the private nonprofit organization that is conducting the raffe. The Legislature, two-thirds of the membership of each house concurring, may amend the percentage of gross receipts re-quired by this subdivision to be dedicated to benefcial or charitable pur-poses by means of a statute that is signed by the Governor. [As amended March 7, 2000.] SEC. 20. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 20, below.] * Ballot Proposition 1A (SCA 11) March 7, 2000. † Ballot Proposition 17 (SCA 4) March 7, 2000. [Fish and Game—Districts and Commission] SEC. 20. (a) The Legislature may provide for division of the State into fish and game districts and may protect fish and game in districts or parts of districts. (b) There is a Fish and Game Commission of 5 members appointed by the Governor and approved by the Senate, a majority of the membership concurring, for 6-year terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Appointment to fll a vacancy is for the unexpired portion of the term. The Legislature may delegate to the commission such powers relat-ing to the protection and propagation of fish and game as the Legislature sees ft. A member of the commission may be removed by concurrent res-olution adopted by each house, a majority of the membership concurring. [New section adopted November 8, 1966.] [War- or Enemy-Caused Disaster] SEC. 21. To meet the needs resulting from war-caused or enemy-caused disaster in California, the Legislature may provide for: (a) Filling the offices of members of the Legislature should at least one ffth of the membership of either house be killed, missing, or disabled, un-til they are able to perform their duties or successors are elected. (b) Filling the office of Governor should the Governor be killed, miss-ing, or disabled, until the Governor or the successor designated in this Constitution is able to perform the duties of the office of Governor or a successor is elected. (c) Convening the Legislature. (d) Holding elections to fll offices that are elective under this Constitu-tion and that are either vacant or occupied by persons not elected thereto. (e) Selecting a temporary seat of state or county government. [As amended November 5, 1974.] [Accountability—Session Goals and Objectives] SEC. 22. It is the right of the people to hold their legislators account-able. To assist the people in exercising this right, at the convening of each regular session of the Legislature, the President pro Tempore of the Sen-ate, the Speaker of the Assembly, and the minority leader of each house shall report to their house the goals and objectives of that house during that session and, at the close of each regular session, the progress made toward meeting those goals and objectives. [New section adopted June 5, 1990.] SEC. 22a. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 23. [Renumbered Section 9 of Article II June 8, 1976.] SEC. 23a. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 23b. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 24. [Renumbered Section 10 of Article II June 8, 1976.] SEC. 25. [Renumbered Section 11 of Article II June 8, 1976.] SEC. 25a. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 25. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 255⁄8. [Renumbered Section 22 of Article XIII and amended November 8, 1966.] SEC. 25¾. [Renumbered Section 25.7 and amended November 6, 1962.] SEC. 25.7. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 26. [Renumbered Section 12 of Article II June 8, 1976.] SEC. 27. [Repealed June 3, 1980.] [State Capitol Maintenance—Appropriations] SEC. 28. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, no bill shall take effect as an urgency statute if it authorizes or contains an appropriation for either (1) the alteration or modifcation of the color, de-tail, design, structure or fxtures of the historically restored areas of the first, second, and third foors and the exterior of the west wing of the State Capitol from that existing upon the completion of the project of restoration or rehabilitation of the building conducted pursuant to Section 9124 of the Government Code as such section read upon the effective date of this sec-tion, or (2) the purchase of furniture of different design to replace that re-stored, replicated, or designed to conform to the historic period of the his-torically restored areas specified above, including the legislators’ chairs and desks in the Senate and Assembly Chambers. (b) No expenditures shall be made in payment for any of the purposes described in subdivision (a) of this section unless funds are appropriated expressly for such purposes. (c) This section shall not apply to appropriations or expenditures for or-dinary repair and maintenance of the State Capitol building, fxtures and furniture. [New Section adopted June 3, 1980.] SEC. 29. [Renumbered Section 23 of Article XIII and amended November 8, 1966.] SEC. 30. [Renumbered Section 24 of Article XIII and amended November 8, 1966.] SEC. 31. [Renumbered Section 25 of Article XIII and amended November 8, 1966.] SEC. 31a. [Renumbered Section 26 of Article XIII and amended November 8, 1966.] SEC. 31b. [As adopted by Assembly Constitutional Amendment 14 of 1931, repealed November 6, 1956.] SEC. 31b. [As adopted November 8, 1932, renumbered Section 27 of Article XIII and amended November 8, 1966.] SEC. 31c. [As adopted November 3, 1936, renumbered Section 28 of Article XIII and amended November 8, 1966.] SEC. 31c. [As adopted November 3, 1942, repealed November 6, 1956.] SEC. 31d. [Repealed November 6, 1956.] SEC. 32. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 33. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 34. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 34a. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 35. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 36. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 37. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 38. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] ARTICLE V. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Article V, below.] ARTICLE V * EXECUTIVE [Executive Power Vested in Governor] SECTION 1. The supreme executive power of this State is vested in the Governor. The Governor shall see that the law is faithfully executed. [As amended November 5, 1974.] [Election—Eligibility—Number of Terms] SEC. 2. The Governor shall be elected every fourth year at the same time and places as members of the Assembly and hold office from the Monday after January 1 following the election until a successor qualifes. The Governor shall be an elector who has been a citizen of the United States and a resident of this State for 5 years immediately preceding the Governor’s election. The Governor may not hold other public office. No Governor may serve more than 2 terms. [As amended November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Report to Legislature—Recommendations] SEC. 3. The Governor shall report to the Legislature each calendar year on the condition of the State and may make recommendations. [As amended November 7, 1972.] SEC. 4. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 4, below.] * New Article V adopted November 8, 1966. [Information From Executive officers, Etc.] SEC. 4. The Governor may require executive officers and agencies and their employees to furnish information relating to their duties. [New section adopted November 8, 1966.] [Filling Vacancies—Confrmation by Legislature] SEC. 5. (a) Unless the law otherwise provides, the Governor may fll a vacancy in office by appointment until a successor qualifes. (b) Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Superintendent of Public Instruction, the Lieutenant Governor, Secretary of State, Controller, Treasurer, or Attorney General, or on the State Board of Equalization, the Governor shall nominate a person to fll the vacancy who shall take office upon confrmation by a majority of the membership of the Senate and a majority of the membership of the Assembly and who shall hold office for the balance of the unexpired term. In the event the nominee is neither confrmed nor refused confrmation by both the Senate and the Assembly within 90 days of the submission of the nomination, the nominee shall take office as if he or she had been confrmed by a majority of the Senate and Assembly; provided, that if such 90-day period ends during a recess of the Legislature, the period shall be extended until the sixth day following the day on which the Legislature reconvenes. [As amended November 2, 1976.] SEC. 6. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 6, below.] [Executive Assignment and Agency Reorganization] SEC. 6. Authority may be provided by statute for the Governor to assign and reorganize functions among executive officers and agencies and their employees, other than elective officers and agencies administered by elective officers. [New section adopted November 8, 1966.] [Commander of Militia] SEC. 7. The Governor is commander in chief of a militia that shall be provided by statute. The Governor may call it forth to execute the law. [As amended November 5, 1974.] [Reprieves—Pardons—Commutations] SEC. 8. (a) Subject to application procedures provided by statute, the Governor, on conditions the Governor deems proper, may grant a reprieve, pardon, and commutation, after sentence, except in case of impeachment. The Governor shall report to the Legislature each reprieve, pardon, and commutation granted, stating the pertinent facts and the reasons for granting it. The Governor may not grant a pardon or commutation to a person twice convicted of a felony except on recommendation of the Supreme Court, 4 judges concurring. (b) No decision of the parole authority of this State with respect to the granting, denial, revocation, or suspension of parole of a person sentenced to an indeterminate term upon conviction of murder shall become effective for a period of 30 days, during which the Governor may review the deci-sion subject to procedures provided by statute. The Governor may only affrm, modify, or reverse the decision of the parole authority on the basis of the same factors which the parole authority is required to consider. The Governor shall report to the Legislature each parole decision affrmed, modifed, or reversed, stating the pertinent facts and reasons for the action. [As amended November 8, 1988.] [Lieutenant Governor—Qualifcations—Casting Vote] SEC. 9. The Lieutenant Governor shall have the same qualifcations as the Governor. The Lieutenant Governor is President of the Senate but has only a casting vote. [As amended November 5, 1974.] [Succession] SEC. 10. The Lieutenant Governor shall become Governor when a va-cancy occurs in the office of Governor. The Lieutenant Governor shall act as Governor during the impeachment, absence from the State, or other temporary disability of the Governor or of a Governor-elect who fails to take office. The Legislature shall provide an order of precedence after the Lieutenant Governor for succession to the office of Governor and for the temporary exercise of the Governor’s functions. The Supreme Court has exclusive jurisdiction to determine all questions arising under this section. Standing to raise questions of vacancy or temporary disability is vested exclusively in a body provided by statute. [As amended November 5, 1974.] [Other State officers—Election—Number of Terms] SEC. 11. The Lieutenant Governor, Attorney General, Controller, Sec-retary of State, and Treasurer shall be elected at the same time and places and for the same term as the Governor. No Lieutenant Governor, Attorney General, Controller, Secretary of State, or Treasurer may serve in the same office for more than 2 terms. [As amended November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] SEC. 12. [Repealed June 5, 1990.] [Attorney General—Chief Law officer] SEC. 13. Subject to the powers and duties of the Governor, the Attor-ney General shall be the chief law officer of the State. It shall be the duty of the Attorney General to see that the laws of the State are uniformly and adequately enforced. The Attorney General shall have direct supervision over every district attorney and sheriff and over such other law enforce-ment officers as may be designated by law, in all matters pertaining to the duties of their respective offices, and may require any of said officers to make reports concerning the investigation, detection, prosecution, and punishment of crime in their respective jurisdictions as to the Attorney General may seem advisable. Whenever in the opinion of the Attorney General any law of the State is not being adequately enforced in any county, it shall be the duty of the Attorney General to prosecute any viola-tions of law of which the superior court shall have jurisdiction, and in such cases the Attorney General shall have all the powers of a district attorney. When required by the public interest or directed by the Governor, the At-torney General shall assist any district attorney in the discharge of the du-ties of that office. [As amended November 5, 1974.] [State officers—conflict of Interest—Prohibited Compensation—Earned Income] SEC. 14. (a) To eliminate any appearance of a conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties and responsibilities, no state officer may knowingly receive any salary, wages, commissions, or other similar earned income from a lobbyist or lobbying frm, as defined by the Political Re-form Act of 1974, or from a person who, during the previous 12 months, has been under a contract with the state agency under the jurisdiction of the state officer. The Legislature shall enact laws that define earned in-come. However, earned income does not include any community property interest in the income of a spouse. Any state officer who knowingly re-ceives any salary, wages, commissions, or other similar earned income from a lobbyist employer, as defined by the Political Reform Act of 1974, may not, for a period of one year following its receipt, vote upon or make, participate in making, or in any way attempt to use his or her official posi-tion to infuence an action or decision before the agency for which the state officer serves, other than an action or decision involving a bill described in subdivision (c) of Section 12 of Article IV, which he or she knows, or has reason to know, would have a direct and signifcant fnancial impact on the lobbyist employer and would not impact the public generally or a signif-cant segment of the public in a similar manner. As used in this subdivision, “public generally” includes an industry, trade, or profession. [State officers—Honoraria] (b) No state officer may accept any honorarium. The Legislature shall enact laws that implement this subdivision. [State officers—Gifts—Conflict of Interest] (c) The Legislature shall enact laws that ban or strictly limit the acceptance of a gift by a state officer from any source if the acceptance of the gift might create a conflict of interest. [State officers—Prohibited Compensation or Activity] (d) No state officer may knowingly accept any compensation for appearing, agreeing to appear, or taking any other action on behalf of another person before any state government board or agency. If a state officer knowingly accepts any compensation for appearing, agreeing to appear, or taking any other action on behalf of another person before any local government board or agency, the state officer may not, for a period of one year following the acceptance of the compensation, make, participate in making, or in any way attempt to use his or her official position to influence an action or decision before the state agency for which the state officer serves, other than an action or decision involving a bill described in subdivision (c) of Section 12 of Article IV, which he or she knows, or has reason to know, would have a direct and significant financial impact on that person and would not impact the public generally or a significant segment of the public in a similar manner. As used in this subdivision, “public generally” includes an industry, trade, or profession. However, a state officer may engage in activities involving a board or agency which are strictly on his or her own behalf, appear in the capacity of an attorney before any court or the Workers’ Compensation Appeals Board, or act as an advocate without compensation or make an inquiry for information on behalf of a person before a board or agency. This subdivision does not prohibit any action of a partnership or firm of which the state officer is a member if the state officer does not share directly or indirectly in the fee, less any expenses attributable to that fee, resulting from that action. [State officers—Lobbying] (e) The Legislature shall enact laws that prohibit a state officer, or a secretary of an agency or director of a department appointed by the Governor, who has not resigned or retired from state service prior to January 7, 1991, from lobbying, for compensation, as governed by the Political Reform Act of 1974, before the executive branch of state government for 12 months after leaving office. [State officer—Definition] (f) “State officer,” as used in this section, means the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Attorney General, Controller, Insurance Commissioner, Secretary of State, Superintendent of Public Instruction, Treasurer, and member of the State Board of Equalization. [New section adopted June 5, 1990. Subdivision (b) operative December 3, 1990.] SEC. 15. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 16. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 17. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 18. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 20. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 21. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 22. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] ARTICLE VI. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Article VI, below.] ARTICLE VI * JUDICIAL [Judicial Power Vested in Courts] SECTION 1. The judicial power of this State is vested in the Supreme Court, courts of appeal, and superior courts, all of which are courts of re-cord. [As amended November 5, 2002.] SEC. 1a. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 1b. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 1c. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] [Supreme Court—Composition] SEC. 2. The Supreme Court consists of the Chief Justice of California and 6 associate justices. The Chief Justice may convene the court at any time. Concurrence of 4 judges present at the argument is necessary for a judgment. An acting Chief Justice shall perform all functions of the Chief Justice when the Chief Justice is absent or unable to act. The Chief Justice or, if the Chief Justice fails to do so, the court shall select an associate justice as acting Chief Justice. [As amended November 5, 1974.] [Judicial Districts—Courts of Appeal] SEC. 3. The Legislature shall divide the State into districts each con-taining a court of appeal with one or more divisions. Each division consists of a presiding justice and 2 or more associate justices. It has the power of a court of appeal and shall conduct itself as a 3-judge court. Concurrence of 2 judges present at the argument is necessary for a judgment. An acting presiding justice shall perform all functions of the presiding justice when the presiding justice is absent or unable to act. The presiding justice or, if the presiding justice fails to do so, the Chief Justice shall se-lect an associate justice of that division as acting presiding justice. [As amended November 5, 1974.] [Superior Courts] SEC. 4. In each county there is a superior court of one or more judges. The Legislature shall prescribe the number of judges and provide for the officers and employees of each superior court. If the governing body of each affected county concurs, the Legislature may provide that one or more judges serve more than one superior court. In each superior court there is an appellate division. The Chief Justice shall assign judges to the appellate division for specified terms pursuant to * New Article VI adopted November 8, 1966. rules, not inconsistent with statute, adopted by the Judicial Council to pro-mote the independence of the appellate division. [As amended June 2, 1998.] SEC. 4a. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 4b. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 4c. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 4d. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 4e. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 4. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 4¾. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 5. [Repealed November 5, 2002.] SEC. 5.5. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] [Judicial Council—Membership and Powers] SEC. 6. (a) The Judicial Council consists of the Chief Justice and one other judge of the Supreme Court, three judges of courts of appeal, 10 judges of superior courts, two nonvoting court administrators, and any other nonvoting members as determined by the voting membership of the council, each appointed by the Chief Justice for a three-year term pursuant to procedures established by the council; four members of the State Bar appointed by its governing body for three-year terms; and one member of each house of the Legislature appointed as provided by the house. (b) Council membership terminates if a member ceases to hold the posi-tion that qualified the member for appointment. A vacancy shall be flled by the appointing power for the remainder of the term. (c) The council may appoint an Administrative Director of the Courts, who serves at its pleasure and performs functions delegated by the council or the Chief Justice, other than adopting rules of court administration, practice and procedure. (d) To improve the administration of justice the council shall survey ju-dicial business and make recommendations to the courts, make recom-mendations annually to the Governor and Legislature, adopt rules for court administration, practice and procedure, and perform other functions pre-scribed by statute. The rules adopted shall not be inconsistent with statute. (e) The Chief Justice shall seek to expedite judicial business and to equalize the work of judges. The Chief Justice may provide for the assign-ment of any judge to another court but only with the judge’s consent if the court is of lower jurisdiction. A retired judge who consents may be assigned to any court. (f) Judges shall report to the council as the Chief Justice directs con-cerning the condition of judicial business in their courts. They shall coop-erate with the council and hold court as assigned. [As amended November 5, 2002.] SEC. 7. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 7, below.] [Commission on Judicial Appointments—Membership] SEC. 7. The Commission on Judicial Appointments consists of the Chief Justice, the Attorney General, and the presiding justice of the court of appeal of the affected district or, if there are 2 or more presiding jus-tices, the one who has presided longest or, when a nomination or appoint-ment to the Supreme Court is to be considered, the presiding justice who has presided longest on any court of appeal. [New section adopted Novem-ber 8, 1966.] [Commission on Judicial Performance—Membership] SEC. 8. (a) The Commission on Judicial Performance consists of one judge of a court of appeal and two judges of superior courts, each appoint-ed by the Supreme Court; two members of the State Bar of California who have practiced law in this State for 10 years, each appointed by the Gov-ernor; and six citizens who are not judges, retired judges, or members of the State Bar of California, two of whom shall be appointed by the Gover-nor, two by the Senate Committee on Rules, and two by the Speaker of the Assembly. Except as provided in subdivisions (b) and (c), all terms are for four years. No member shall serve more than two four-year terms, or for more than a total of 10 years if appointed to fll a vacancy. (b) Commission membership terminates if a member ceases to hold the position that qualified the member for appointment. A vacancy shall be flled by the appointing power for the remainder of the term. A member whose term has expired may continue to serve until the vacancy has been flled by the appointing power. Appointing powers may appoint members who are already serving on the commission prior to March 1, 1995, to a single two-year term, but may not appoint them to an additional term thereafter. (c) To create staggered terms among the members of the Commission on Judicial Performance, the following members shall be appointed, as follows: (1) Two members appointed by the Supreme Court to a term commenc-ing March 1, 1995, shall each serve a term of two years and may be reap-pointed to one full term. (2) One attorney appointed by the Governor to a term commencing March 1, 1995, shall serve a term of two years and may be reappointed to one full term. (3) One citizen member appointed by the Governor to a term commenc-ing March 1, 1995, shall serve a term of two years and may be reappointed to one full term. (4) One member appointed by the Senate Committee on Rules to a term commencing March 1, 1995, shall serve a term of two years and may be reappointed to one full term. (5) One member appointed by the Speaker of the Assembly to a term commencing March 1, 1995, shall serve a term of two years and may be reappointed to one full term. (6) All other members shall be appointed to full four-year terms com-mencing March 1, 1995. [As amended November 5, 2002.] SEC. 9. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 9, below.] [State Bar] SEC. 9. The State Bar of California is a public corporation. Every per-son admitted and licensed to practice law in this State is and shall be a member of the State Bar except while holding office as a judge of a court of record. [New section adopted November 8, 1966.] SEC. 10. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 10, below.] [Jurisdiction—Original] SEC. 10. The Supreme Court, courts of appeal, superior courts, and their judges have original jurisdiction in habeas corpus proceedings. Those courts also have original jurisdiction in proceedings for extraordinary re-lief in the nature of mandamus, certiorari, and prohibition. The appellate division of the superior court has original jurisdiction in proceedings for extraordinary relief in the nature of mandamus, certiorari, and prohibition directed to the superior court in causes subject to its appellate jurisdiction. Superior courts have original jurisdiction in all other causes. The court may make any comment on the evidence and the testimony and credibility of any witness as in its opinion is necessary for the proper determination of the cause. [As amended November 5, 2002.] SEC. 10a. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 10b. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] [Jurisdiction—Appellate] SEC. 11. (a) The Supreme Court has appellate jurisdiction when judg-ment of death has been pronounced. With that exception courts of appeal have appellate jurisdiction when superior courts have original jurisdic-tion in causes of a type within the appellate jurisdiction of the courts of appeal on June 30, 1995, and in other causes prescribed by statute. When appellate jurisdiction in civil causes is determined by the amount in con-troversy, the Legislature may change the appellate jurisdiction of the courts of appeal by changing the jurisdictional amount in controversy. (b) Except as provided in subdivision (a), the appellate division of the superior court has appellate jurisdiction in causes prescribed by statute. (c) The Legislature may permit courts exercising appellate jurisdiction to take evidence and make findings of fact when jury trial is waived or not a matter of right. [As amended June 2, 1998.] [Transfer of Causes—Jurisdiction—Review of Decisions] SEC. 12. (a) The Supreme Court may, before decision, transfer to it-self a cause in a court of appeal. It may, before decision, transfer a cause from itself to a court of appeal or from one court of appeal or division to another. The court to which a cause is transferred has jurisdiction. (b) The Supreme Court may review the decision of a court of appeal in any cause. (c) The Judicial Council shall provide, by rules of court, for the time and procedure for transfer and for review, including, among other things, pro-visions for the time and procedure for transfer with instructions, for review of all or part of a decision, and for remand as improvidently granted. (d) This section shall not apply to an appeal involving a judgment of death. [As amended November 6, 1984. Operative May 6, 1985.] [Judgment—When Set Aside] SEC. 13. No judgment shall be set aside, or new trial granted, in any cause, on the ground of misdirection of the jury, or of the improper admis-sion or rejection of evidence, or for any error as to any matter of pleading, or for any error as to any matter of procedure, unless, after an examination of the entire cause, including the evidence, the court shall be of the opinion that the error complained of has resulted in a miscarriage of justice. [New section adopted November 8, 1966.] SEC. 14. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 14, below.] [Supreme Court and Appellate Court—Published Opinions] SEC. 14. The Legislature shall provide for the prompt publication of such opinions of the Supreme Court and courts of appeal as the Supreme Court deems appropriate, and those opinions shall be available for publi-cation by any person. Decisions of the Supreme Court and courts of appeal that determine causes shall be in writing with reasons stated. [New section adopted No-vember 8, 1966.] [Judges—Eligibility] SEC. 15. A person is ineligible to be a judge of a court of record unless for 10 years immediately preceding selection, the person has been a mem-ber of the State Bar or served as a judge of a court of record in this State. [As amended November 5, 2002.] SEC. 15.5. [Repealed January 1, 1995.] [Judges—Elections—Terms—Vacancies] SEC. 16. (a) Judges of the Supreme Court shall be elected at large and judges of courts of appeal shall be elected in their districts at general elec-tions at the same time and places as the Governor. Their terms are 12 years beginning the Monday after January 1 following their election, except that a judge elected to an unexpired term serves the remainder of the term. In creating a new court of appeal district or division the Legislature shall pro-vide that the first elective terms are 4, 8, and 12 years. (b) Judges of superior courts shall be elected in their counties at general elections except as otherwise necessary to meet the requirements of fed-eral law. In the latter case the Legislature, by two-thirds vote of the mem-bership of each house thereof, with the advice of judges within the affect-ed court, may provide for their election by the system prescribed in subdivision (d), or by any other arrangement. The Legislature may provide that an unopposed incumbent’s name not appear on the ballot. (c) Terms of judges of superior courts are six years beginning the Mon-day after January 1 following their election. A vacancy shall be filled by election to a full term at the next general election after the second January 1 following the vacancy, but the Governor shall appoint a person to fill the vacancy temporarily until the elected judge’s term begins. (d) (1) Within 30 days before August 16 preceding the expiration of the judge’s term, a judge of the Supreme Court or a court of appeal may file a declaration of candidacy to succeed to the office presently held by the judge. If the declaration is not fled, the Governor before September 16 shall nominate a candidate. At the next general election, only the candidate so declared or nominated may appear on the ballot, which shall present the question whether the candidate shall be elected. The candidate shall be elected upon receiving a majority of the votes on the question. A candidate not elected may not be appointed to that court but later may be nominated and elected. (2) The Governor shall fill vacancies in those courts by appointment. An appointee holds office until the Monday after January 1 following the first general election at which the appointee had the right to become a candidate or until an elected judge qualifies. A nomination or appointment by the Governor is effective when confirmed by the Commission on Judicial Appointments. (3) Electors of a county, by majority of those voting and in a manner the Legislature shall provide, may make this system of selection applicable to judges of superior courts. [As amended November 5, 2002.] [Judges—Restrictions, Other Employment, and Benefits] SEC. 17. A judge of a court of record may not practice law and during the term for which the judge was selected is ineligible for public employment or public office other than judicial employment or judicial office, except a judge of a court of record may accept a part-time teaching position that is outside the normal hours of his or her judicial position and that does not interfere with the regular performance of his or her judicial duties while holding office. A judge of a trial court of record may, however, become eligible for election to other public office by taking a leave of absence without pay prior to fling a declaration of candidacy. Acceptance of the public office is a resignation from the office of judge. A judicial officer may not receive fines or fees for personal use. A judicial officer may not earn retirement service credit from a public teaching position while holding judicial office. [As amended November 8, 1988.] [Judges—Discipline] SEC. 18. (a) A judge is disqualified from acting as a judge, without loss of salary, while there is pending (1) an indictment or an information charging the judge in the United States with a crime punishable as a felony under California or federal law, or (2) a petition to the Supreme Court to review a determination by the Commission on Judicial Performance to remove or retire a judge. (b) The Commission on Judicial Performance may disqualify a judge from acting as a judge, without loss of salary, upon notice of formal proceedings by the commission charging the judge with judicial misconduct or disability. (c) The Commission on Judicial Performance shall suspend a judge from office without salary when in the United States the judge pleads guilty or no contest or is found guilty of a crime punishable as a felony under California or federal law or of any other crime that involves moral turpitude under that law. If the conviction is reversed, suspension termi-nates, and the judge shall be paid the salary for the judicial office held by the judge for the period of suspension. If the judge is suspended and the conviction becomes fnal, the Commission on Judicial Performance shall remove the judge from office. (d) Except as provided in subdivision (f), the Commission on Judicial Performance may (1) retire a judge for disability that seriously interferes with the performance of the judge’s duties and is or is likely to become permanent, or (2) censure a judge or former judge or remove a judge for action occurring not more than 6 years prior to the commencement of the judge’s current term or of the former judge’s last term that constitutes will-ful misconduct in office, persistent failure or inability to perform the judge’s duties, habitual intemperance in the use of intoxicants or drugs, or conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice that brings the judicial office into disrepute, or (3) publicly or privately admonish a judge or for-mer judge found to have engaged in an improper action or dereliction of duty. The commission may also bar a former judge who has been censured from receiving an assignment, appointment, or reference of work from any California state court. Upon petition by the judge or former judge, the Su-preme Court may, in its discretion, grant review of a determination by the commission to retire, remove, censure, admonish, or disqualify pursuant to subdivision (b) a judge or former judge. When the Supreme Court re-views a determination of the commission, it may make an independent review of the record. If the Supreme Court has not acted within 120 days after granting the petition, the decision of the commission shall be fnal. (e) A judge retired by the commission shall be considered to have re-tired voluntarily. A judge removed by the commission is ineligible for ju-dicial office, including receiving an assignment, appointment, or reference of work from any California state court, and pending further order of the court is suspended from practicing law in this State. The State Bar may institute appropriate attorney disciplinary proceedings against any judge who retires or resigns from office with judicial disciplinary charges pend-ing. (f) A determination by the Commission on Judicial Performance to ad-monish or censure a judge or former judge of the Supreme Court or re-move or retire a judge of the Supreme Court shall be reviewed by a tribu-nal of 7 court of appeal judges selected by lot. (g) No court, except the Supreme Court, shall have jurisdiction in a civ-il action or other legal proceeding of any sort brought against the commis-sion by a judge. Any request for injunctive relief or other provisional rem-edy shall be granted or denied within 90 days of the fling of the request for relief. A failure to comply with the time requirements of this section does not affect the validity of commission proceedings. (h) Members of the commission, the commission staff, and the examin-ers and investigators employed by the commission shall be absolutely im-mune from suit for all conduct at any time in the course of their official duties. No civil action may be maintained against a person, or adverse em-ployment action taken against a person, by any employer, public or pri-vate, based on statements presented by the person to the commission. (i) The Commission on Judicial Performance shall make rules imple-menting this section, including, but not limited to, the following: (1) The commission shall make rules for the investigation of judges. The commission may provide for the confdentiality of complaints to and investigations by the commission. (2) The commission shall make rules for formal proceedings against judges when there is cause to believe there is a disability or wrongdoing within the meaning of subdivision (d). (j) When the commission institutes formal proceedings, the notice of charges, the answer, and all subsequent papers and proceedings shall be open to the public for all formal proceedings instituted after February 28, 1995. (k) The commission may make explanatory statements. (l) The budget of the commission shall be separate from the budget of any other state agency or court. (m) The Supreme Court shall make rules for the conduct of judges, both on and off the bench, and for judicial candidates in the conduct of their campaigns. These rules shall be referred to as the Code of Judicial Ethics. [As amended November 8, 1994. Operative March 1, 1995.] [Subordinate Judicial officers—Discipline] SEC. 18.1. The Commission on Judicial Performance shall exercise discretionary jurisdiction with regard to the oversight and discipline of subordinate judicial officers, according to the same standards, and subject to review upon petition to the Supreme Court, as specified in Section 18. No person who has been found unfit to serve as a subordinate judicial officer after a hearing before the Commission on Judicial Performance shall have the requisite status to serve as a subordinate judicial officer. This section does not diminish or eliminate the responsibility of a court to exercise initial jurisdiction to discipline or dismiss a subordinate judicial officer as its employee. [New section adopted June 2, 1998.] [Disciplined Judge Under Consideration for Judicial Appointment] SEC. 18.5. (a) Upon request, the Commission on Judicial Performance shall provide to the Governor of any State of the Union the text of any private admonishment, advisory letter, or other disciplinary action together with any information that the Commission on Judicial Performance deems necessary to a full understanding of the commission’s action, with respect to any applicant whom the Governor of any State of the Union indicates is under consideration for any judicial appointment. (b) Upon request, the Commission on Judicial Performance shall provide the President of the United States the text of any private admonishment, advisory letter, or other disciplinary action together with any information that the Commission on Judicial Performance deems necessary to a full understanding of the commission’s action, with respect to any applicant whom the President indicates is under consideration for any federal judicial appointment. (c) Upon request, the Commission on Judicial Performance shall provide the Commission on Judicial Appointments the text of any private admonishment, advisory letter, or other disciplinary action together with any information that the Commission on Judicial Performance deems necessary to a full understanding of the commission action, with respect to any applicant whom the Commission on Judicial Appointments indicates is under consideration for any judicial appointment. (d) All information released under this section shall remain confidential and privileged. (e) Notwithstanding subdivision (d), any information released pursuant to this section shall also be provided to the applicant about whom the information was requested. (f) “Private admonishment” refers to a disciplinary action against a judge by the Commission on Judicial Performance as authorized by sub-division (c) of Section 18 of Article VI, as amended November 8, 1988. [New section adopted November 8, 1994. Operative March 1, 1995.] [Judges—Compensation] SEC. 19. The Legislature shall prescribe compensation for judges of courts of record. A judge of a court of record may not receive the salary for the judicial office held by the judge while any cause before the judge remains pending and undetermined for 90 days after it has been submitted for decision. [As amended November 5, 1974.] SEC. 20. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 20, below.] [Judges—Retirement—Disability] SEC. 20. The Legislature shall provide for retirement, with reasonable allowance, of judges of courts of record for age or disability. [New section adopted November 8, 1966.] SEC. 21. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 21, below.] [Temporary Judges] SEC. 21. On stipulation of the parties litigant the court may order a cause to be tried by a temporary judge who is a member of the State Bar, sworn and empowered to act until final determination of the cause. [New section adopted November 8, 1966.] [Appointment of officers—Subordinate Judicial Duties] SEC. 22. The Legislature may provide for the appointment by trial courts of record of officers such as commissioners to perform subordinate judicial duties. [New section adopted November 8, 1966.] SEC. 23. [Repealed November 8, 1966. See Section 23, below.] [Superior and Municipal Court Consolidation] SEC. 23. (a) The purpose of the amendments to Sections 1, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, and 16, of this article, and the amendments to Section 16 of Article I, approved at the June 2, 1998, primary election is to permit the Legislature to provide for the abolition of the municipal courts and unify their operations within the superior courts. Notwithstanding Section 8 of Article IV, the implementation of, and orderly transition under, the provisions of the measure adding this section may include urgency statutes that create or abolish offices or change the salaries, terms, or duties of offices, or grant franchises or special privileges, or create vested rights or interests, where otherwise permitted under this Constitution. (b) When the superior and municipal courts within a county are unified, the judgeships in each municipal court in that county are abolished and the previously selected municipal court judges shall become judges of the superior court in that county. The term of office of a previously selected municipal court judge is not affected by taking office as a judge of the superior court. The 10-year membership or service requirement of Section 15 does not apply to a previously selected municipal court judge. Pursuant to Section 6, the Judicial Council may prescribe appropriate education and training for judges with regard to trial court unification. (c) Except as provided by statute to the contrary, in any county in which the superior and municipal courts become unified, the following shall occur automatically in each preexisting superior and municipal court: (1) Previously selected officers, employees, and other personnel who serve the court become the officers and employees of the superior court. (2) Preexisting court locations are retained as superior court locations. (3) Preexisting court records become records of the superior court. (4) Pending actions, trials, proceedings, and other business of the court become pending in the superior court under the procedures previously applicable to the matters in the court in which the matters were pending. (5) Matters of a type previously within the appellate jurisdiction of the superior court remain within the jurisdiction of the appellate division of the superior court. (6) Matters of a type previously subject to rehearing by a superior court judge remain subject to rehearing by a superior court judge, other than the judge who originally heard the matter. (7) Penal Code procedures that necessitate superior court review of, or action based on, a ruling or order by a municipal court judge shall be performed by a superior court judge other than the judge who originally made the ruling or order. (d) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2007, and as of that date is repealed. [As amended and repealed November 5, 2002. Repealed on January 1, 2007.] SEC. 24. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] SEC. 26. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] ARTICLE VII PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES [Civil Service] SECTION 1. (a) The civil service includes every officer and employee of the State except as otherwise provided in this Constitution. * New Article VII adopted June 8, 1976. (b) In the civil service permanent appointment and promotion shall be made under a general system based on merit ascertained by competitive examination. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Personnel Board—Membership and Compensation] SEC. 2. (a) There is a Personnel Board of 5 members appointed by the Governor and approved by the Senate, a majority of the membership concurring, for 10-year terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Appointment to fill a vacancy is for the unexpired portion of the term. A member may be removed by concurrent resolution adopted by each house, two-thirds of the membership of each house concurring. (b) The board annually shall elect one of its members as presiding officer. (c) The board shall appoint and prescribe compensation for an executive officer who shall be a member of the civil service but not a member of the board. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Personnel Board—Duties] SEC. 3. (a) The board shall enforce the civil service statutes and, by majority vote of all its members, shall prescribe probationary periods and classifications, adopt other rules authorized by statute, and review disciplinary actions. (b) The executive officer shall administer the civil service statutes under rules of the board. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Exempt Positions] SEC. 4. The following are exempt from civil service: (a) officers and employees appointed or employed by the Legislature, either house, or legislative committees. (b) officers and employees appointed or emissions or public corporations in the judicial branch or by a court of record or officer thereof. (c) officers elected by the people and a deputy and an employee selected by each elected officer. (d) Members of boards and commissions. (e) A deputy or employee selected by each board or commission either appointed by the Governor or authorized by statute. (f) State officers directly appointed by the Governor with or without the consent or confirmation of the Senate and the employees of the Governor’s office, and the employees of the Lieutenant Governor’s office directly appointed or employed by the Lieutenant Governor. (g) A deputy or employee selected by each officer, except members of boards and commissions, exempted under Section 4(f). (h) officers and employees of the University of California and the California State Colleges. (i) The teaching staff of schools under the jurisdiction of the Department of Education or the Superintendent of Public Instruction. (j) Member, inmate, and patient help in state homes, charitable or correctional institutions, and state facilities for mentally ill or retarded persons. (k) Members of the militia while engaged in military service. (l) officers and employees of district agricultural associations employed less than 6 months in a calendar year. (m) In addition to positions exempted by other provisions of this sec-tion, the Attorney General may appoint or employ six deputies or employ-ees, the Public Utilities Commission may appoint or employ one deputy or employee, and the Legislative Counsel may appoint or employ two depu-ties or employees. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Temporary Appointments] SEC. 5. A temporary appointment may be made to a position for which there is no employment list. No person may serve in one or more positions under temporary appointment longer than 9 months in 12 consecutive months. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Veterans’ Preferences—Special Rules] SEC. 6. (a) The Legislature may provide preferences for veterans and their surviving spouses. (b) The board by special rule may permit persons in exempt positions, brought under civil service by constitutional provision, to qualify to continue in their positions. (c) When the State undertakes work previously performed by a county, city, public district of this State or by a federal department or agency, the board by special rule shall provide for persons who previously performed this work to qualify to continue in their positions in the state civil service subject to such minimum standards as may be established by statute. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Dual office Holding] SEC. 7. A person holding a lucrative office under the United States or other power may not hold a civil office of profit. A local officer or postmaster whose compensation does not exceed 500 dollars per year or an officer in the militia or a member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States except where on active federal duty for more than 30 days in any year is not a holder of a lucrative office, nor is the holding of a civil office of profit affected by this military service. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Disqualification From Holding office or Serving on Jury—Free Suffrage] SEC. 8. (a) Every person shall be disqualified from holding any office of profit in this State who shall have been convicted of having given or offered a bribe to procure personal election or appointment. (b) Laws shall be made to exclude persons convicted of bribery, perjury, forgery, malfeasance in office, or other high crimes from office or serving on juries. The privilege of free suffrage shall be supported by laws regulating elections and prohibiting, under adequate penalties, all undue influence thereon from power, bribery, tumult, or other improper practice. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Persons or Organizations Advocating Overthrow of Government] SEC. 9. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, no person or organization which advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States or the State by force or violence or other unlawful means or who advocates the support of a foreign government against the United States in the event of hostilities shall: (a) Hold any office or employment under this State, including but not limited to the University of California, or with any county, city or county, city, district, political subdivision, authority, board, bureau, commission or other public agency of this State; or (b) Receive any exemption from any tax imposed by this State or any county, city or county, city, district, political subdivision, authority, board, bureau, commission or other public agency of this State. The Legislature shall enact such laws as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this section. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Elected officials—Disqualification for Libelous or Slanderous Campaign Statements] SEC. 10. (a) No person who is found liable in a civil action for making libelous or slanderous statements against an opposing candidate during the course of an election campaign for any federal, statewide, Board of Equalization, or legislative office or for any county, city and county, city, district, or any other local elective office shall retain the seat to which he or she is elected, where it is established that the libel or slander was a major contributing cause in the defeat of an opposing candidate. A libelous or slanderous statement shall be deemed to have been made by a person within the meaning of this section if that person actually made the statement or if the person actually or constructively assented to, authorized, or ratified the statement. “Federal office,” as used in this section means the office of United States Senator and Member of the House of Representatives; and to the extent that the provisions of this section do not conflict with any provision of federal law, it is intended that candidates seeking the office of United States Senator or Member of the House of Representatives comply with this section. (b) In order to determine whether libelous or slanderous statements were a major contributing cause in the defeat of an opposing candidate, the trier of fact shall make a separate, distinct finding on that issue. If the trier of fact finds that libel or slander was a major contributing cause in the defeat of an opposing candidate and that the libelous or slanderous statement was made with knowledge that it was false or with reckless disregard of whether it was false or true, the person holding office shall be disqualified from or shall forfeit that office as provided in subdivision (d). The findings required by this section shall be in writing and shall be incorporated as part of the judgment. (c) In a case where a person is disqualified from holding office or is required to forfeit an office under subdivisions (a) and (b), that disqualification or forfeiture shall create a vacancy in office, which vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided by law for the filling of a vacancy in that particular office. (d) Once the judgment of liability is entered by the trial court and the time for fling a notice of appeal has expired, or all possibility of direct attack in the courts of this State has been finally exhausted, the person shall be disqualified from or shall forfeit the office involved in that election and shall have no authority to exercise the powers or perform the duties of the office. (e) This section shall apply to libelous or slanderous statements made on or after the effective date of this section. [New section adopted June 5, 1984.] [Legislators’ and Judges’ Retirement Systems] SEC. 11. (a) The Legislators’ Retirement System shall not pay any unmodified retirement allowance or its actuarial equivalent to any person who on or after January 1, 1987, entered for the first time any state office for which membership in the Legislators’ Retirement System was elective or to any beneficiary or survivor of such a person, which exceeds the higher of (1) the salary receivable by the person currently serving in the office in which the retired person served or (2) the highest salary that was received by the retired person while serving in that office. (b) The Judges’ Retirement System shall not pay any unmodified retirement allowance or its actuarial equivalent to any person who on or after January 1, 1987, entered for the first time any judicial office subject to the Judges’ Retirement System or to any beneficiary or survivor of such a person, which exceeds the higher of (1) the salary receivable by the person currently serving in the judicial office in which the retired person served or (2) the highest salary that was received by the retired person while serving in that judicial office. (c) The Legislature may define the terms used in this section. (d) If any part of this measure or the application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications which reasonably can be given effect without the invalid pro-vision or application. [As amended November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE VIII. [Repealed November 8, 1966.] ARTICLE IX EDUCATION [Legislative Policy] SECTION 1. A general diffusion of knowledge and intelligence being essential to the preservation of the rights and liberties of the people, the Legislature shall encourage by all suitable means the promotion of intellectual, scientific, moral, and agricultural improvement. [Superintendent of Public Instruction—Election—Date of office—Number of Terms] SEC. 2. A Superintendent of Public Instruction shall be elected by the qualified electors of the State at each gubernatorial election. The Superintendent of Public Instruction shall enter upon the duties of the office on the first Monday after the first day of January next succeeding each gubernatorial election. No Superintendent of Public Instruction may serve more than 2 terms. [As amended November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Deputy and Associate Superintendents of Public Instruction] SEC. 2.1. The State Board of Education, on nomination of the Superintendent of Public Instruction, shall appoint one Deputy Superintendent of Public Instruction and three Associate Superintendents of Public Instruction who shall be exempt from state civil service and whose terms of office shall be four years. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting the appointment, in accordance with law, of additional Associate Superintendents of Public Instruction subject to state civil service. [New section adopted November 5, 1946.] [County Superintendents of Schools] SEC. 3. A Superintendent of Schools for each county may be elected by the qualified electors thereof at each gubernatorial election or may be appointed by the county board of education, and the manner of the selection shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors of the county voting on the question; provided, that two or more counties may, by an election conducted pursuant to Section 3.2 of this article, unite for the purpose of electing or appointing one joint superintendent for the counties so uniting. [As amended November 2, 1976.] [County Superintendents of Schools—Qualifications and Salaries] SEC. 3.1. (a) Notwithstanding any provision of this Constitution to the contrary, the Legislature shall prescribe the qualifications required of county superintendents of schools, and for these purposes shall classify the several counties in the State. (b) Notwithstanding any provision of this Constitution to the contrary, the county board of education or joint county board of education, as the case may be, shall fix the salary of the county superintendent of schools or the joint county superintendent of schools, respectively. [As amended November 2, 1976.] [Joint County Board of Education—Joint County Superintendent of Schools] SEC. 3.2. Notwithstanding any provision of this Constitution to the contrary, any two or more chartered counties, or non-chartered counties, or any combination thereof, may, by a majority vote of the electors of each such county voting on the proposition at an election called for that purpose in each such county, establish one joint board of education and one joint county superintendent of schools for the counties so uniting. A joint county board of education and a joint county superintendent of schools shall be governed by the general statutes and shall not be governed by the provisions of any county charter. [New section adopted November 2, 1976.] [County Boards of Education—Qualifications and Terms of office] SEC. 3.3. Except as provided in Section 3.2 of this article, it shall be competent to provide in any charter framed for a county under any provision of this Constitution, or by the amendment of any such charter, for the election of the members of the county board of education of such county and for their qualifications and terms of office. [As amended November 2, 1976.] SEC. 4. [Repealed November 3, 1964.] [Common School System] SEC. 5. The Legislature shall provide for a system of common schools by which a free school shall be kept up and supported in each district at least six months in every year, after the first year in which a school has been established. [Public Schools—Salaries] SEC. 6. Each person, other than a substitute employee, employed by a school district as a teacher or in any other position requiring certification qualifications shall be paid a salary which shall be at the rate of an annual salary of not less than twenty-four hundred dollars ($2,400) for a person serving full time, as defined by law. [Public School System] The Public School System shall include all kindergarten schools, elementary schools, secondary schools, technical schools, and state colleges, established in accordance with law and, in addition, the school districts and the other agencies authorized to maintain them. No school or college or any other part of the Public School System shall be, directly or indirectly, transferred from the Public School System or placed under the jurisdiction of any authority other than one included within the Public School System. [Support of Public School System—State Aid] The Legislature shall add to the State School Fund such other means from the revenues of the State as shall provide in said fund for apportionment in each fiscal year, an amount not less than one hundred eighty dollars ($180) per pupil in average daily attendance in the kindergarten schools, elementary schools, secondary schools, and technical schools in the Public School System during the next preceding fiscal year. The entire State School Fund shall be apportioned in each fiscal year in such manner as the Legislature may provide, through the school districts and other agencies maintaining such schools, for the support of, and aid to, kindergarten schools, elementary schools, secondary schools, and technical schools except that there shall be apportioned to each school district in each fiscal year not less than one hundred twenty dollars ($120) per pupil in average daily attendance in the district during the next preceding fiscal year and except that the amount apportioned to each school district in each fiscal year shall be not less than twenty-four hundred dollars ($2,400). Solely with respect to any retirement system provided for in the charter of any county or city and county pursuant to the provisions of which the contributions of, and benefits to, certificated employees of a school district who are members of such system are based upon the proportion of the salaries of such certificated employees contributed by said county or city and county, all amounts apportioned to said county or city and county, or to school districts therein, pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be considered as though derived from county or city and county school taxes for the support of county and city and county government and not money provided by the State within the meaning of this section. [As amended November 5, 1974.] [School Districts—Bonds] SEC. 6. Nothing in this Constitution contained shall forbid the formation of districts for school purposes situate in more than one county or the issuance of bonds by such districts under such general laws as have been or may hereafter be prescribed by the Legislature; and the officers mentioned in such laws shall be authorized to levy and assess such taxes and perform all such other acts as may be prescribed therein for the purpose of paying such bonds and carrying out the other powers conferred upon such districts; provided, that all such bonds shall be issued subject to the limitations prescribed in section eighteen † of article eleven hereof. [New section adopted November 7, 1922.] [Boards of Education] SEC. 7. The Legislature shall provide for the appointment or election of the State Board of Education and a board of education in each county or for the election of a joint county board of education for two or more counties. [As amended November 2, 1976.] [Free Textbooks] SEC. 7.5. The State Board of Education shall adopt textbooks for use in grades one through eight throughout the State, to be furnished without cost as provided by statute. [New section adopted June 2, 1970.] [Sectarian Schools—Public Money—Doctrines] SEC. 8. No public money shall ever be appropriated for the support of any sectarian or denominational school, or any school not under the exclusive control of the officers of the public schools; nor shall any sectarian or denominational doctrine be taught, or instruction thereon be permitted, directly or indirectly, in any of the common schools of this State. [University of California] SEC. 9. (a) The University of California shall constitute a public trust, to be administered by the existing corporation known as “The Regents of the University of California,” with full powers of organization and government, subject only to such legislative control as may be necessary to insure the security of its funds and compliance with the terms of the endowments of the university and such competitive bidding procedures as may be made applicable to the university by statute for the letting of construction contracts, sales of real property, and purchasing of materials, goods, and services. Said corporation shall be in form a board composed of seven ex officio members, which shall be: the Governor, the Lieutenant Governor, the Speaker of the Assembly, the Superintendent of Public Instruction, the president and the vice president of the alumni association of the university and the acting president of the university, and 18 appointive members appointed by the Governor and approved by the Senate, a majority of the membership concurring; provided, however that the present appointive members shall hold office until the expiration of their present terms. (b) The terms of the members appointed prior to November 5, 1974, shall be 16 years; the terms of two appointive members to expire as here- † Former Section 18 of Article XI added to Article XIII as Section 40, June 2, 1970 and repealed November 5, 1974. to fore on March 1st of every even-numbered calendar year, and two members shall be appointed for terms commencing on March 1, 1976, and on March 1 of each year thereafter; provided that no such appointments shall be made for terms to commence on March 1, 1979, or on March 1 of each fourth year thereafter, to the end that no appointment to the regents for a newly commencing term shall be made during the first year of any gubernatorial term of office. The terms of the members appointed for terms commencing on and after March 1, 1976, shall be 12 years. During the period of transition until the time when the appointive membership is comprised exclusively of persons serving for terms of 12 years, the total number of appointive members may exceed the numbers specified in the preceeding paragraph. In case of any vacancy, the term of office of the appointee to fill such vacancy, who shall be appointed by the Governor and approved by the Senate, a majority of the membership concurring, shall be for the balance of the term for which such vacancy exists. (c) The members of the board may, in their discretion, following procedures established by them and after consultation with representatives of faculty and students of the university, including appropriate officers of the academic senate and student governments, appoint to the board either or both of the following persons as members with all rights of participation: a member of the faculty at a campus of the university or of another institution of higher education; a person enrolled as a student at a campus of the university for each regular academic term during his service as a member of the board. Any person so appointed shall serve for not less than one year commencing on July 1. (d) Regents shall be able persons broadly reflective of the economic, cultural, and social diversity of the State, including ethnic minorities and women. However, it is not intended that formulas or specific ratios be applied in the selection of regents. (e) In the selection of the Regents, the Governor shall consult an advisory committee composed as follows: The Speaker of the Assembly and two public members appointed by the Speaker, the President Pro Tempore of the Senate and two public members appointed by the Rules Committee of the Senate, two public members appointed by the Governor, the chairman of the regents of the university, an alumnus of the university chosen by the alumni association of the university, a student of the university chosen by the Council of Student Body Presidents, and a member of the faculty of the university chosen by the academic senate of the university. Public members shall serve for four years, except that one each of the initially appointed members selected by the Speaker of the Assembly, the President Pro Tempore of the Senate, and the Governor shall be appointed to serve for two years; student, alumni, and faculty members shall serve for one year and may not be regents of the university at the time of their service on the advisory committee. (f) The Regents of the University of California shall be vested with the legal title and the management and disposition of the property of the university and of property held for its benefit and shall have the power to take and hold, either by purchase or by donation, or gift, testamentary or otherwise, or in any other manner, without restriction, all real and personal property for the benefit of the university or incidentally to its conduct; provided, however, that sales of university real property shall be subject to such competitive bidding procedures as may be provided by statute. Said corporation shall also have all the powers necessary or convenient for the effective administration of its trust, including the power to sue and to be sued, to use a seal, and to delegate to its committees or to the faculty of the university, or to others, such authority or functions as it may deem wise. The Regents shall receive all funds derived from the sale of lands pursuant to the act of Congress of July 2, 1862, and any subsequent acts amendatory thereof. The university shall be entirely independent of all political or sectarian influence and kept free therefrom in the appointment of its regents and in the administration of its affairs, and no person shall be debarred admission to any department of the university on account of race, religion, ethnic heritage, or sex. (g) Meetings of the Regents of the University of California shall be public, with exceptions and notice requirements as may be provided by statute. [As amended November 2, 1976.] SEC. 10. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 11. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 12. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 13. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] [School District Incorporation and Organization—Governing Board Powers] SEC. 14. The Legislature shall have power, by general law, to provide for the incorporation and organization of school districts, high school districts, and community college districts, of every kind and class, and may classify such districts. The Legislature may authorize the governing boards of all school districts to initiate and carry on any programs, activities, or to otherwise act in any manner which is not in conflict with the laws and purposes for which school districts are established. [As amended November 7, 1972. Operative July 1, 1973.] SEC. 15. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] [Boards of Education—City Charter Provisions] SEC. 16. (a) It shall be competent, in all charters framed under the authority given by Section 5 of Article XI, to provide, in addition to those provisions allowable by this Constitution, and by the laws of the State for the manner in which, the times at which, and the terms for which the members of boards of education shall be elected or appointed, for their qualifcations, compensation and removal, and for the number which shall constitute any one of such boards. [Charter Amendments—Approval by Voters] (b) Notwithstanding Section 3 of Article XI, when the boundaries of a school district or community college district extend beyond the limits of a city whose charter provides for any or all of the foregoing with respect to the members of its board of education, no charter amendment effecting a change in the manner in which, the times at which, or the terms for which the members of the board of education shall be elected or appointed, for their qualifcations, compensation, or removal, or for the number which shall constitute such board, shall be adopted unless it is submitted to and approved by a majority of all the qualified electors of the school district or community college district voting on the question. Any such amendment, and any portion of a proposed charter or a revised charter which would establish or change any of the foregoing provisions respecting a board of education, shall be submitted to the electors of the school district or community college district as one or more separate questions. The failure of any such separate question to be approved shall have the result of continuing in effect the applicable existing law with respect to that board of edu-cation. [As amended June 6, 1978.] ARTICLE X * WATER [State’s Right of Eminent Domain] SECTION 1. The right of eminent domain is hereby declared to exist in the State to all frontages on the navigable waters of this State. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Conservation and Benefcial Use of Water—Riparian Rights] SEC. 2. It is hereby declared that because of the conditions prevailing in this State the general welfare requires that the water resources of the State be put to benefcial use to the fullest extent of which they are capable, and that the waste or unreasonable use or unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and that the conservation of such waters is to be exercised with a view to the reasonable and benefcial use thereof in the interest of the people and for the public welfare. The right to water or to the use or fow of water in or from any natural stream or water course in * New Article X adopted June 8, 1976. this State is and shall be limited to such water as shall be reasonably required for the benefcial use to be served, and such right does not and shall not extend to the waste or unreasonable use or unreasonable method of use or unreasonable method of diversion of water. Riparian rights in a stream or water course attach to, but to no more than so much of the fow thereof as may be required or used consistently with this section, for the purposes for which such lands are, or may be made adaptable, in view of such reasonable and benefcial uses; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as depriving any riparian owner of the reasonable use of water of the stream to which the owner’s land is riparian under rea-sonable methods of diversion and use, or as depriving any appropriator of water to which the appropriator is lawfully entitled. This section shall be self-executing, and the Legislature may also enact laws in the furtherance of the policy in this section contained. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Tidelands] SEC. 3. All tidelands within two miles of any incorporated city, city and county, or town in this State, and fronting on the water of any harbor, estuary, bay, or inlet used for the purposes of navigation, shall be withheld from grant or sale to private persons, partnerships, or corporations; pro-vided, however, that any such tidelands, reserved to the State solely for street purposes, which the Legislature finds and declares are not used for navigation purposes and are not necessary for such purposes may be sold to any town, city, county, city and county, municipal corporations, private persons, partnerships or corporations subject to such conditions as the Legislature determines are necessary to be imposed in connection with any such sales in order to protect the public interest. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Access to Navigable Waters] SEC. 4. No individual, partnership, or corporation, claiming or pos-sessing the frontage or tidal lands of a harbor, bay, inlet, estuary, or other navigable water in this State, shall be permitted to exclude the right of way to such water whenever it is required for any public purpose, nor to destroy or obstruct the free navigation of such water; and the Legislature shall en-act such laws as will give the most liberal construction to this provision, so that access to the navigable waters of this State shall be always attain-able for the people thereof. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [State Control of Water Use] SEC. 5. The use of all water now appropriated, or that may hereafter be appropriated, for sale, rental, or distribution, is hereby declared to be a public use, and subject to the regulation and control of the State, in the manner to be prescribed by law. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Compensation for Water Use] SEC. 6. The right to collect rates or compensation for the use of water supplied to any county, city and county, or town, or the inhabitants thereof, is a franchise, and cannot be exercised except by authority of and in the manner prescribed by law. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Acquisition of Real Property—Conformance to California Water Laws] SEC. 7. Whenever any agency of government, local, state, or federal, hereafter acquires any interest in real property in this State, the acceptance of the interest shall constitute an agreement by the agency to conform to the laws of California as to the acquisition, control, use, and distribution of water with respect to the land so acquired. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] ARTICLE X A * WATER RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT [Article X A has no force or effect because Senate Bill No. 200 of the 1979–80 Regular Session of the Legislature was defeated by referendum vote June 8, 1982] [Water Rights, Water Quality, and Fish and Wildlife Resources Guaranteed and Protected] SECTION 1. The people of the State hereby provide the following guar-antees and protections in this article for water rights, water quality, and fish and wildlife resources. [New section adopted November 4, 1980. Sec-tion has no force or effect because Senate Bill No. 200 of the 1979–80 Regular Session of the Legislature was defeated by referendum vote June 8, 1982.] [Statutes for Protection of Fish and Wildlife Resources, Delta, Etc.] SEC. 2. No statute amending or repealing, or adding to, the provisions of the statute enacted by Senate Bill No. 200 † of the 1979–80 Regular Session of the Legislature which specify (1) the manner in which the State will protect fish and wildlife resources in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, Suisun Marsh, and San Francisco Bay system westerly of the delta; (2) the manner in which the State will protect existing water rights in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta; and (3) the manner in which the State will operate the State Water Resources Development System to comply with water quality standards and water quality control plans, shall become ef-fective unless approved by the electors in the same manner as statutes amending initiative statutes are approved; except that the Legislature may, * New Article X A adopted November 4, 1980. † Chapter 632, Statutes of 1980. by statute passed in each house by roll call vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring, amend or repeal, or add to, these provisions if the statute does not in any manner reduce the protection of the delta or fish and wildlife. [New section adopted November 4, 1980. Section has no force or effect because Senate Bill No. 200 of the 1979–80 Regular Session of the Legislature was defeated by referendum vote June 8, 1982.] [Appropriations of Water—Components of California Wild and Scenic Rivers System] SEC. 3. No water shall be available for appropriation by storage in, or by direct diversion from, any of the components of the California Wild and Scenic Rivers System, as such system exists on January 1, 1981, where such appropriation is for export of water into another major hydrologic basin of the State, as defined in the Department of Water Resources Bulletin 160-74, unless such export is expressly authorized prior to such appropriation by: (a) an initiative statute approved by the electors, or (b) the Legislature, by statute passed in each house by roll call vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring. [New section adopted November 4, 1980. Section has no force or effect because Senate Bill No. 200 of the 1979–80 Regular Session of the Legislature was defeated by referendum vote June 8, 1982.] [Statutes Amending, Repealing, or Adding to Delta Protection Act] SEC. 4. No statute amending or repealing, or adding to, the provisions of Part 4.5 (commencing with Section 12200) of Division 6 of the Water Code (the Delta Protection Act) shall become effective unless approved by the electors in the same manner as statutes amending initiative statutes are approved; except that the Legislature may, by statute passed in each house by roll call vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring, amend or repeal, or add to, these provisions if the statute does not in any manner reduce the protection of the delta or fish and wildlife. [New section adopted November 4, 1980. Section has no force or effect because Senate Bill No. 200 of the 1979–80 Regular Session of the Legislature was defeated by referendum vote June 8, 1982.] [Eminent Domain Proceedings to Acquire Water Rights or Contract Rights for Water or Water Quality Maintenance in Delta Prohibited] SEC. 5. No public agency may utilize eminent domain proceedings to acquire water rights, which are held for uses within the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta as defined in Section 12220 of the Water Code, or any contract rights for water or water quality maintenance in the Delta for the purpose of exporting such water from the Delta. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the utilization of eminent domain proceedings for the purpose of acquiring land or any other rights necessary for the construction of water facilities, including, but not limited to, facilities authorized in Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 12930) of Part 6 of Division 6 of the Water Code. [New section adopted November 4, 1980. Section has no force or effect because Senate Bill No. 200 of the 1979–80 Regular Session of the Legislature was defeated by referendum vote June 8, 1982.] [Actions and Proceedings] SEC. 6. (a) The venue of any of the following actions or proceedings brought in a superior court shall be Sacramento County: (1) An action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any provision of the statute enacted by Senate Bill No. 200 † of the 1979– 80 Regular Session of the Legislature. (2) An action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul the determination made by the Director of Water Resources and the Direc-tor of Fish and Game pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 11255 of the Water Code. (3) An action or proceeding which would have the effect of attacking, reviewing, preventing, or substantially delaying the construction, opera-tion, or maintenance of the peripheral canal unit described in subdivision (a) of Section 11255 of the Water Code. (4) An action or proceeding to require the State Water Resources Devel-opment System to comply with subdivision (b) of Section 11460 of the Water Code. (5) An action or proceeding to require the Department of Water Re-sources or its successor agency to comply with the permanent agreement specified in subdivision (a) of Section 11256 of the Water Code. (6) An action or proceeding to require the Department of Water Re-sources or its successor agency to comply with the provisions of the con-tracts entered into pursuant to Section 11456 of the Water Code. (b) An action or proceeding described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) shall be commenced within one year after the effective date of the stat-ute enacted by Senate Bill No. 200 † of the 1979–80 Regular Session of the Legislature. Any other action or proceeding described in subdivision (a) shall be commenced within one year after the cause of action arises un-less a shorter period is otherwise provided by statute. (c) The superior court or a court of appeals shall give preference to the actions or proceedings described in this section over all civil actions or proceedings pending in the court. The superior court shall commence hearing any such action or proceeding within six months after the com-mencement of the action or proceeding, provided that any such hearing may be delayed by joint stipulation of the parties or at the discretion of the court for good cause shown. The provisions of this section shall supersede † Chapter 632, Statutes of 1980. any provisions of law requiring courts to give preference to other civil ac-tions or proceedings. The provisions of this subdivision may be enforced by mandamus. (d) The Supreme Court shall, upon the request of any party, transfer to itself, before a decision in the court of appeal, any appeal or petition for extraordinary relief from an action or proceeding described in this section, unless the Supreme Court determines that the action or proceeding is un-likely to substantially affect (1) the construction, operation, or mainte-nance of the peripheral canal unit described in subdivision (a) of Section 11255 of the Water Code, (2) compliance with subdivision (b) of Section 11460 of the Water Code, (3) compliance with the permanent agreement specified in Section 11256 of the Water Code, or (4) compliance with the provisions of the contracts entered into pursuant to Section 11456 of the Water Code. The request for transfer shall receive preference on the Su-preme Court’s calendar. If the action or proceeding is transferred to the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court shall commence to hear the matter within six months of the transfer unless the parties by joint stipulation re-quest additional time or the court, for good cause shown, grants additional time. (e) The remedy prescribed by the court for an action or proceeding de-scribed in paragraph (4), (5), or (6) of subdivision (a) shall include, but need not be limited to, compliance with subdivision (b) of Section 11460 of the Water Code, the permanent agreement specified in Section 11256 of the Water Code, or the provisions of the contracts entered into pursuant to Section 11456 of the Water Code. (f) The Board of Supervisors of the County of Sacramento may apply to the State Board of Control for actual costs imposed by the requirements of this section upon the county, and the State Board of Control shall pay such actual costs. (g) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, nothing in this Arti-cle shall be construed as prohibiting the Supreme Court from exercising the transfer authority contained in Article VI, Section 12 of the Constitu-tion. [New section adopted November 4, 1980. Section has no force or ef-fect because Senate Bill No. 200 of the 1979–80 Regular Session of the Legislature was defeated by referendum vote June 8, 1982.] [State Agencies’ Exercise of Authorized Powers] SEC. 7. State agencies shall exercise their authorized powers in a man-ner consistent with the protections provided by this article. [New section adopted November 4, 1980. Section has no force or effect because Senate Bill No. 200 of the 1979–80 Regular Session of the Legislature was de-feated by referendum vote June 8, 1982.] [Force or Effect of Article] SEC. 8. This article shall have no force or effect unless Senate Bill No. 200 † of the 1979–80 Regular Session of the Legislature is enacted and takes effect. [New section adopted November 4, 1980. Section has no force or effect because Senate Bill No. 200 of the 1979–80 Regular Session of the Legislature was defeated by referendum vote June 8, 1982.] ARTICLE X B * MARINE RESOURCES PROTECTION ACT OF 1990 [Title] SECTION 1. This article shall be known and may be cited as the Marine Resources Protection Act of 1990. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [definitions] SEC. 2. (a) “District” means a fish and game district as defined in the Fish and Game Code by statute on January 1, 1990. (b) Except as specifcally provided in this article, all references to Fish and Game Code sections, articles, chapters, parts, and divisions are de-fned as those statutes in effect on January 1, 1990. (c) “Ocean waters” means the waters of the Pacifc Ocean regulated by the State. (d) “Zone” means the Marine Resources Protection zone established pursuant to this article. The zone consists of the following: (1) In waters less than 70 fathoms or within one mile, whichever is less, around the Channel Islands consisting of the Islands of San Miguel, Santa Rosa, Santa Cruz, Anacapa, San Nicolaus, Santa Barbara, Santa Catalina, and San Clemente. (2) The area within three nautical miles offishore of the mainland coast, and the area within three nautical miles off any manmade breakwater, be-tween a line extending due west from Point Arguello and a line extending due west from the Mexican border. (3) In waters less than 35 fathoms between a line running 180 degrees true from Point Fermin and a line running 270 degrees true from the south jetty of Newport Harbor. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initia-tive measure.] [Gill and Trammel Nets—Usage] SEC. 3. (a) From January 1, 1991, to December 31, 1993, inclusive, gill nets or trammel nets may only be used in the zone pursuant to a non- † Chapter 632, Statutes of 1980. * New Article X B adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure. transferable permit issued by the Department of Fish and Game pursuant to Section 5. (b) On and after January 1, 1994, gill nets and trammel nets shall not be used in the zone. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative mea-sure.] [Gill and Trammel Nets—Usage] SEC. 4. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, gill nets and trammel nets may not be used to take any species of rockfish. (b) In ocean waters north of Point Arguello on and after the effective date of this article, the use of gill nets and trammel nets shall be regulated by the provisions of Article 4 (commencing with Section 8660), Article 5 (commencing with Section 8680) and Article 6 (commencing with Section 8720) of Chapter 3 of Part 3 of Division 6 of the Fish and Game Code, or any regulation or order issued pursuant to these articles, in effect on Janu-ary 1, 1990, except that as to Sections 8680, 8681, 8681.7, and 8682, and subdivisions (a) through (f), inclusive of Section 8681.5 of the Fish and Game Code, or any regulation or order issued pursuant to these sections, the provisions in effect on January 1, 1989, shall control where not in con-fict with other provisions of this article, and shall be applicable to all ocean waters. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the Legisla-ture shall not be precluded from imposing more restrictions on the use and/ or possession of gill nets or trammel nets. The Director of the Department of Fish and Game shall not authorize the use of gill nets or trammel nets in any area where the use is not permitted even if the director makes spec-ifed findings. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative mea-sure.] [Gill and Trammel Nets—Usage] SEC. 5. The Department of Fish and Game shall issue a permit to use a gill net or trammel net in the zone for the period specified in subdivision (a) of Section 3 to any applicant who meets both of the following require-ments: (a) Has a commercial fishing license issued pursuant to Sections 7850– 7852.3 of the Fish and Game Code. (b) Has a permit issued pursuant to Section 8681 of the Fish and Game Code and is presently the owner or operator of a vessel equipped with a gill net or trammel net. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Permit Fees] SEC. 6. The Department of Fish and Game shall charge the following fees for permits issued pursuant to Section 5 pursuant to the following schedule: Calendar Year Fee 1991 $250 1992 500 1993 1,000 [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Permitholder’s Compensation for Discontinuing Fishing with Gill and Trammel Nets] SEC. 7. (a) Within 90 days after the effective date of this section, ev-ery person who intends to seek the compensation provided in subdivision (b) shall notify the Department of Fish and Game, on forms provided by the department, of that intent. Any person who does not submit the form within that 90-day period shall not be compensated pursuant to subdivi-sion (b). The department shall publish a list of all persons submitting the form within 120 days after the effective date of this section. (b) After July 1, 1993, and before January 1, 1994, any person who holds a permit issued pursuant to Section 5 and operates in the zone may surrender that permit to the department and agree to permanently discon-tinue fishing with gill or trammel nets in the zone, for which he or she shall receive, beginning on July 1, 1993, a one time compensation which shall be based upon the average annual ex vessel value of the fish other than any species of rockfish landed by a fisherman, which were taken pursuant to a valid general gill net or trammel net permit issued pursuant to Sections 8681 and 8682 of the Fish and Game Code within the zone during the years 1983 to 1987, inclusive. The department shall verify those landings by reviewing logs and landing receipts submitted to it. Any person who is denied compensation by the department as a result of the department’s failure to verify landings may appeal that decision to the Fish and Game Commission. (c) The State Board of Control shall, prior to the disbursement of any funds, verify the eligibility of each person seeking compensation and the amount of the compensation to be provided in order to ensure compliance with this section. (d) Unless the Legislature enacts any required enabling legislation to implement this section on or before July 1, 1993, no compensation shall be paid under this article. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initia-tive measure.] [Marine Resources Protection Account—Fees—Interest] SEC. 8. (a) There is hereby created the Marine Resources Protection Account in the Fish and Game Preservation Fund. On and after January 1, 1991, the Department of Fish and Game shall collect any and all fees re-quired by this article. All fees received by the department pursuant to this article shall be deposited in the account and shall be expended or encum-bered to compensate persons who surrender permits pursuant to Section 7 or to provide for administration of this article. All funds received by the department during any fiscal year pursuant to this article which are not ex-pended during that fiscal year to compensate persons as set forth in Section 7 or to provide for administration of this article shall be carried over into the following fiscal year and shall be used only for those purposes. All in-terest accrued from the department’s retention of fees received pursuant to this article shall be credited to the account. The accrued interest may only be expended for the purposes authorized by this article. The account shall continue in existence, and the requirement to pay fees under this article shall remain in effect, until the compensation provided in Section 7 has been fully funded or until January 1, 1995, whichever occurs first. (b) An amount, not to exceed 15 percent of the total annual revenues deposited in the account excluding any interest accrued or any funds car-ried over from a prior fiscal year may be expended for the administration of this article. (c) In addition to a valid California sportfishing license issued pursuant to Sections 7149, 7149.1 or 7149.2 of the Fish and Game Code and any applicable sport license stamp issued pursuant to the Fish and Game Code, a person taking fish from ocean waters south of a line extending due west from Point Arguello for sport purposes shall have permanently affxed to that person’s sportfishing license a marine resources protection stamp which may be obtained from the department upon payment of a fee of three dollars ($3). This subdivision does not apply to any one-day fishing license. (d) In addition to a valid California commercial passenger fishing boat license required by Section 7920 of the Fish and Game Code, the owner of any boat or vessel who, for profit, permits any person to fish from the boat or vessel in ocean waters south of a line extending due west from Point Arguello, shall obtain and permanently affx to the license a commercial marine resources protection stamp which may be obtained from the de-partment upon payment of a fee of three dollars ($3). (e) The department may accept contributions or donations from any per-son who wishes to donate money to be used for the compensation of com-mercial gill net and trammel net fishermen who surrender permits under this article. (f) This section shall become inoperative on January 1, 1995. [New sec-tion adopted November 6, 1990. Inoperative January 1, 1995. Initiative measure.] [Marine Resources Protection Account—Grants] SEC. 9. Any funds remaining in the Marine Resources Protection Ac-count in the Fish and Game Preservation Fund on or after January 1, 1995, shall, with the approval of the Fish and Game Commission, be used to pro-vide grants to colleges, universities and other bonafde scientifc research groups to fund marine resource related scientifc research within the eco-logical reserves established by Section 14 of this act. [New section adopt-ed November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Report to Legislature] SEC. 10. On or before December 31 of each year, the Director of Fish and Game shall prepare and submit a report to the Legislature regarding the implementation of this article including an accounting of all funds. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Violations] SEC. 11. It is unlawful for any person to take, possess, receive, trans-port, purchase, sell, barter, or process any fish obtained in violation of this article. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Commercial Fishing Daily Landings Monitoring and Evaluating Program] SEC. 12. To increase the State’s scientifc and biological information on the ocean fisheries of this State, the Department of Fish and Game shall establish a program whereby it can monitor and evaluate the daily landings of fish by commercial fishermen who are permitted under this article to take these fish. The cost of implementing this monitoring program shall be borne by the commercial fishing industry. [New section adopted Novem-ber 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Penalties for Violations—Probation—Fine] SEC. 13. (a) The penalty for a first violation of the provisions of Sec-tions 3 and 4 of this article is a fne of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) and not more than fve thousand dollars ($5,000) and a manda-tory suspension of any license, permit or stamp to take, receive, transport, purchase, sell, barter or process fish for commercial purposes for six months. The penalty for a second or subsequent violation of the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of this article is a fne of not less than two thousand fve hundred dollars ($2,500) and not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) and a mandatory suspension of any license, permit or stamp to take, receive, transport, purchase, sell, barter, or process fish for commer-cial purposes for one year. (b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, a violation of Section 8 of this article shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of Section 7145 of the Fish and Game Code and the penalty for such violation shall be consistent with the provisions of Section 12002.2 of said code. (c) If a person convicted of a violation of Section 3, 4, or 8 of this article is granted probation, the court shall impose as a term or condition of pro-bation, in addition to any other term or condition of probation, that the person pay at least the minimum fne prescribed in this section. [New sec-tion adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [New Ecological Reserves] SEC. 14. Prior to January 1, 1994, the Fish and Game Commission shall establish four new ecological reserves in ocean waters along the mainland coast. Each ecological reserve shall have a surface area of at least two square miles. The commission shall restrict the use of these ecological reserves to scientifc research relating to the management and enhancement of marine resources. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Article not Preempting or Superseding Other Protective Closures] SEC. 15. This article does not preempt or supersede any other closures to protect any other wildlife, including sea otters, whales, and shorebirds. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] [Severability] SEC. 16. If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are severable. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE XI. [Repealed June 2, 1970. See Article XI, below.] ARTICLE XI * LOCAL GOVERNMENT [Counties—Formation, Boundaries, County Seat, officers, and Governing Body] SECTION 1. (a) The State is divided into counties which are legal subdivisions of the State. The Legislature shall prescribe uniform procedure for county formation, consolidation, and boundary change. Formation or consolidation requires approval by a majority of electors voting on the question in each affected county. A boundary change requires approval by the governing body of each affected county. No county seat shall be removed unless two-thirds of the qualified electors of the county, voting on the proposition at a general election, shall vote in favor of such removal. A proposition of removal shall not be submitted in the same county more than once in four years. (b) The Legislature shall provide for county powers, an elected county sheriff, an elected district attorney, an elected assessor, and an elected governing body in each county. Except as provided in subdivision (b) of Section 4 of this article, each governing body shall prescribe by ordinance the compensation of its members, but the ordinance prescribing such compen* New Article XI adopted June 2, 1970. sation shall be subject to referendum. The Legislature or the governing body may provide for other officers whose compensation shall be pre-scribed by the governing body. The governing body shall provide for the number, compensation, tenure, and appointment of employees. [As amend-ed June 7, 1988.] SEC. 2. [Repealed June 2, 1970. See Section 2, below.] [Cities—Formation, Powers] SEC. 2. (a) The Legislature shall prescribe uniform procedure for city formation and provide for city powers. (b) Except with approval by a majority of its electors voting on the ques-tion, a city may not be annexed to or consolidated into another. [New sec-tion adopted June 2, 1970.] [County or City—Charters] SEC. 3. (a) For its own government, a county or city may adopt a char-ter by majority vote of its electors voting on the question. The charter is effective when fled with the Secretary of State. A charter may be amend-ed, revised, or repealed in the same manner. A charter, amendment, revi-sion, or repeal thereof shall be published in the official state statutes. County charters adopted pursuant to this section shall supersede any exist-ing charter and all laws inconsistent therewith. The provisions of a charter are the law of the State and have the force and effect of legislative enact-ments. (b) The governing body or charter commission of a county or city may propose a charter or revision. Amendment or repeal may be proposed by initiative or by the governing body. (c) An election to determine whether to draft or revise a charter and elect a charter commission may be required by initiative or by the govern-ing body. (d) If provisions of 2 or more measures approved at the same election conflict, those of the measure receiving the highest affrmative vote shall prevail. [As amended November 5, 1974.] [County Charters—Provisions] SEC. 4. County charters shall provide for: (a) A governing body of 5 or more members, elected (1) by district or, (2) at large, or (3) at large, with a requirement that they reside in a district. Charter counties are subject to statutes that relate to apportioning popula-tion of governing body districts. (b) The compensation, terms, and removal of members of the governing body. If a county charter provides for the Legislature to prescribe the sal-ary of the governing body, such compensation shall be prescribed by the governing body by ordinance. (c) An elected sheriff, an elected district attorney, an elected assessor, other officers, their election or appointment, compensation, terms and re-moval. (d) The performance of functions required by statute. (e) The powers and duties of governing bodies and all other county of-fcers, and for consolidation and segregation of county officers, and for the manner of flling all vacancies occurring therein. (f) The fxing and regulation by governing bodies, by ordinance, of the appointment and number of assistants, deputies, clerks, attachés, and other persons to be employed, and for the prescribing and regulating by such bodies of the powers, duties, qualifcations, and compensation of such per-sons, the times at which, and terms for which they shall be appointed, and the manner of their appointment and removal. (g) Whenever any county has framed and adopted a charter, and the same shall have been approved by the Legislature as herein provided, the general laws adopted by the Legislature in pursuance of Section 1(b) of this article, shall, as to such county, be superseded by said charter as to matters for which, under this section it is competent to make provision in such charter, and for which provision is made therein, except as herein oth-erwise expressly provided. (h) Charter counties shall have all the powers that are provided by this Constitution or by statute for counties. [As amended June 7, 1988.] SEC. 5. [Repealed June 2, 1970. See Section 5, below.] [City Charters—Provisions] SEC. 5. (a) It shall be competent in any city charter to provide that the city governed thereunder may make and enforce all ordinances and regula-tions in respect to municipal affairs, subject only to restrictions and limita-tions provided in their several charters and in respect to other matters they shall be subject to general laws. City charters adopted pursuant to this Constitution shall supersede any existing charter, and with respect to mu-nicipal affairs shall supersede all laws inconsistent therewith. (b) It shall be competent in all city charters to provide, in addition to those provisions allowable by this Constitution, and by the laws of the State for: (1) the constitution, regulation, and government of the city po-lice force (2) subgovernment in all or part of a city (3) conduct of city elec-tions and (4) plenary authority is hereby granted, subject only to the re-strictions of this article, to provide therein or by amendment thereto, the manner in which, the method by which, the times at which, and the terms for which the several municipal officers and employees whose compensa-tion is paid by the city shall be elected or appointed, and for their removal, and for their compensation, and for the number of deputies, clerks and other employees that each shall have, and for the compensation, method of appointment, qualifcations, tenure of office and removal of such deputies, clerks and other employees. [New section adopted June 2, 1970.] SEC. 5.1. [Repealed June 2, 1970.] SEC. 6. [Repealed June 2, 1970. See Section 6, below.] [Charter City and County] SEC. 6. (a) A county and all cities within it may consolidate as a char-ter city and county as provided by statute. (b) A charter city and county is a charter city and a charter county. Its charter city powers supersede conflicting charter county powers. [New section adopted June 2, 1970.] SEC. 7. [Repealed June 2, 1970. See Section 7, below.] [Local Ordinances and Regulations] SEC. 7. A county or city may make and enforce within its limits all lo-cal, police, sanitary, and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general laws. [New section adopted June 2, 1970.] SEC. 7. [Repealed June 2, 1970.] SEC. 7b. [Repealed June 2, 1970.] [Ballot Measures—Application] SEC. 7.5. (a) A city or county measure proposed by the legislative body of a city, charter city, county, or charter county and submitted to the voters for approval may not do either of the following: (1) Include or exclude any part of the city, charter city, county, or charter county from the application or effect of its provisions based upon approv-al or disapproval of the city or county measure, or based upon the casting of a specified percentage of votes in favor of the measure, by the electors of the city, charter city, county, charter county, or any part thereof. (2) Contain alternative or cumulative provisions wherein one or more of those provisions would become law depending upon the casting of a spec-ifed percentage of votes for or against the measure. (b) “City or county measure,” as used in this section, means an advisory question, proposed charter or charter amendment, ordinance, proposition for the issuance of bonds, or other question or proposition submitted to the voters of a city, or to the voters of a county at an election held throughout an entire single county. [New section adopted June 2, 1998.] SEC. 8. [Repealed June 2, 1970. See Section 8, below.] [Counties—Performance of Municipal Functions] SEC. 8. (a) The Legislature may provide that counties perform mu-nicipal functions at the request of cities within them. (b) If provided by their respective charters, a county may agree with a city within it to assume and discharge specified municipal functions. [New section adopted June 2, 1970.] SEC. 8. [Repealed June 2, 1970.] [Local Utilities] SEC. 9. (a) A municipal corporation may establish, purchase, and op-erate public works to furnish its inhabitants with light, water, power, heat, transportation, or means of communication. It may furnish those services outside its boundaries, except within another municipal corporation which furnishes the same service and does not consent. (b) Persons or corporations may establish and operate works for supply-ing those services upon conditions and under regulations that the city may prescribe under its organic law. [New section adopted June 2, 1970.] [Local Government—Extra Compensation; City, County or District Employees— Residency] SEC. 10. (a) A local government body may not grant extra compensa-tion or extra allowance to a public officer, public employee, or contractor after service has been rendered or a contract has been entered into and per-formed in whole or in part, or pay a claim under an agreement made with-out authority of law. (b) A city or county, including any chartered city or chartered county, or public district, may not require that its employees be residents of such city, county, or district; except that such employees may be required to reside within a reasonable and specifc distance of their place of employment or other designated location. [As amended June 8, 1976.] SEC. 10.5. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] [Private Control of County or Municipal Functions—Deposit and Investment of Public Moneys] SEC. 11. (a) The Legislature may not delegate to a private person or body power to make, control, appropriate, supervise, or interfere with county or municipal corporation improvements, money, or property, or to levy taxes or assessments, or perform municipal functions. (b) The Legislature may, however, provide for the deposit of public moneys in any bank in this State or in any savings and loan association in this State or any credit union in this State or in any federally insured in-dustrial loan company in this State and for payment of interest, principal, and redemption premiums of public bonds and other evidence of public indebtedness by banks within or without this State. It may also provide for investment of public moneys in securities and the registration of bonds and other evidences of indebtedness by private persons or bodies, within or without this State, acting as trustees or fiscal agents. [As amended Novem-ber 8, 1988.] SEC. 12. [As amended June 27, 1933, added to Article XIII as Section 37, June 2, 1970. See Section 12, below.] [Claims Against Counties or Cities, Etc.] SEC. 12. The Legislature may prescribe procedure for presentation, consideration, and enforcement of claims against counties, cities, their officers, agents, or employees. [New section adopted June 2, 1970.] SEC. 13. [Repealed June 2, 1970. See Section 13, below.] [Distribution of Powers—Construction of Article] SEC. 13. The provisions of Sections 1(b) (except for the second sentence), 3(a), 4, and 5 of this Article relating to matters affecting the distribution of powers between the Legislature and cities and counties, including matters affecting supersession, shall be construed as a restatement of all related provisions of the Constitution in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this amendment, and as making no substantive change. The terms general law, general laws, and laws, as used in this Article, shall be construed as a continuation and restatement of those terms as used in the Constitution in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this amendment, and not as effecting a change in meaning. [New section adopted June 2, 1970.] SEC. 13. [As amended November 3, 1914, added to Article XIII as Section 37.5, June 2, 1970.] [Local Government—Taxation] SEC. 14. A local government formed after the effective date of this section, the boundaries of which include all or part of two or more counties, shall not levy a property tax unless such tax has been approved by a majority vote of the qualified voters of that local government voting on the issue of the tax. [New section adopted November 2, 1976.] [Vehicle License Fee Allocations] SEC. 15. (a) From the revenues derived from taxes imposed pursuant to the Vehicle License Fee Law (Part 5 (commencing with Section 10701) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code), or its successor, other than fees on trailer coaches and mobilehomes, over and above the costs of collection and any refunds authorized by law, those revenues derived from that portion of the vehicle license fee rate that does not exceed 0.65 percent of the market value of the vehicle shall be allocated as follows: (1) An amount shall be specified in the Vehicle License Fee Law, or the successor to that law, for deposit in the State Treasury to the credit of the Local Revenue Fund established in Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 17600) of Part 5 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, or its successor, if any, for allocation to cities, counties, and cities and counties as otherwise provided by law. (2) The balance shall be allocated to cities, counties, and cities and counties as otherwise provided by law. (b) If a statute enacted by the Legislature reduces the annual vehicle license fee below 0.65 percent of the market value of a vehicle, the Legislature shall, for each fiscal year for which the reduced fee applies, provide by statue for the allocation of an additional amount of money that is equal to the decrease, resulting from the fee reduction, in the total amount of revenues that are otherwise required to be deposited and allocated under subdivision (a) for that same fiscal year. That amount shall be allocated to cities, counties, and cities and counties in the same pro rata amounts and for the same purposes as are revenues subject to subdivision (a). [As amended November 2, 2004.] SEC. 16. [Added to Article XIII as Section 38, June 2, 1970.] SEC. 16. [As amended November 8, 1932, added to Article XIII as Section 39, June 2, 1970.] SEC. 17. [Repealed June 2, 1970.] SEC. 18. [As amended November 8, 1949, added to Article XIII as Section 40, June 2, 1970.] SEC. 18. [Repealed June 2, 1970.] SEC. 19. [Repealed June 2, 1970.] SEC. 20. [Repealed June 2, 1970.] ARTICLE XII. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Article XII, below.] ARTICLE XII * PUBLIC UTILITIES [Public Utilities Commission—Composition] SECTION 1. The Public Utilities Commission consists of 5 members appointed by the Governor and approved by the Senate, a majority of the membership concurring, for staggered 6-year terms. A vacancy is filled for the remainder of the term. The Legislature may remove a member for in competence, neglect of duty, or corruption, two thirds of the membership of each house concurring. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Public Utilities Commission—Powers and Duties] SEC. 2. Subject to statute and due process, the commission may estab-lish its own procedures. Any commissioner as designated by the commis-sion may hold a hearing or investigation or issue an order subject to com-mission approval. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] * New Article XII adopted November 5, 1974. [Public Utilities—Legislative Control] SEC. 3. Private corporations and persons that own, operate, control, or manage a line, plant, or system for the transportation of people or property, the transmission of telephone and telegraph messages, or the production, generation, transmission, or furnishing of heat, light, water, power, storage, or wharfage directly or indirectly to or for the public, and common carriers, are public utilities subject to control by the Legislature. The Legislature may prescribe that additional classes of private corporations or other persons are public utilities. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Rates—Discrimination in Transportation Charges, Etc.] SEC. 4. The commission may fx rates and establish rules for the transportation of passengers and property by transportation companies, prohibit discrimination, and award reparation for the exaction of unreasonable, excessive, or discriminatory charges. A transportation company may not raise a rate or incidental charge except after a showing to and a decision by the commission that the increase is justifed, and this decision shall not be subject to judicial review except as to whether confscation of property will result. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Public Utilities Commission—Compensation in Eminent Domain Proceedings] SEC. 5. The Legislature has plenary power, unlimited by the other provisions of this constitution but consistent with this article, to confer additional authority and jurisdiction upon the commission, to establish the manner and scope of review of commission action in a court of record, and to enable it to fx just compensation for utility property taken by eminent domain. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Public Utilities Commission—Powers and Duties] SEC. 6. The commission may fx rates, establish rules, examine records, issue subpenas, administer oaths, take testimony, punish for con- tempt, and prescribe a uniform system of accounts for all public utilities subject to its jurisdiction. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Free Passes, Public officials—conflict of Interest, Public Utilities Commissioner] SEC. 7. A transportation company may not grant free passes or discounts to anyone holding an office in this State; and the acceptance of a pass or discount by a public officer, other than a Public Utilities Commissioner, shall work a forfeiture of that office. A Public Utilities Commissioner may not hold an official relation to nor have a fnancial interest in a person or corporation subject to regulation by the commission. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Public Utilities—Regulation] SEC. 8. A city, county, or other public body may not regulate matters over which the Legislature grants regulatory power to the Commission. This section does not affect power over public utilities relating to the making and enforcement of police, sanitary, and other regulations concerning municipal affairs pursuant to a city charter existing on October 10, 1911, unless that power has been revoked by the city’s electors, or the right of any city to grant franchises for public utilities or other businesses on terms, conditions, and in the manner prescribed by law. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Restatement] SEC. 9. The provisions of this article restate all related provisions of the Constitution in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this amendment and make no substantive change. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 10. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 17. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 18. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 19. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 20. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 21. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 22. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 23. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 23a. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] ARTICLE XIII. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Article XIII, below.] ARTICLE XIII * TAXATION SECTION 1. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 1, below.] [Uniformity Clause] SECTION 1. Unless otherwise provided by this Constitution or the laws of the United States: (a) All property is taxable and shall be assessed at the same percentage of fair market value. When a value standard other than fair market value is prescribed by this Constitution or by statute authorized by this Constitution, the same percentage shall be applied to determine the assessed value. The value to which the percentage is applied, whether it be the fair market value or not, shall be known for property tax purposes as the full value. * New Article XIII adopted November 5, 1974. (b) All property so assessed shall be taxed in proportion to its full value. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1a. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1b. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1c. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1d. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1a. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1b. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1a. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1.60. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1.61. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1.62. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1.63. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1.64. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1.65. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1.66. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1.67. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1.68. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1.69. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 1¾. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 2. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 2, below.] [Personal Property Classifcation] SEC. 2. The Legislature may provide for property taxation of all forms of tangible personal property, shares of capital stock, evidences of indebt-edness, and any legal or equitable interest therein not exempt under any other provision of this article. The Legislature, two-thirds of the member-ship of each house concurring, may classify such personal property for differential taxation or for exemption. The tax on any interest in notes, de-bentures, shares of capital stock, bonds, solvent credits, deeds of trust, or mortgages shall not exceed four-tenths of one percent of full value, and the tax per dollar of full value shall not be higher on personal property than on real property in the same taxing jurisdiction. [New section adopted No-vember 5, 1974.] SEC. 2.5. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 2.6. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 2.8. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] [Property Tax Exemptions] SEC. 3. The following are exempt from property taxation: [State Owned Property] (a) Property owned by the State. [Local Government Property] (b) Property owned by a local government, except as otherwise provid-ed in Section 11(a). [Government Bonds] (c) Bonds issued by the State or a local government in the State. [Public Property] (d) Property used for libraries and museums that are free and open to the public and property used exclusively for public schools, community col-leges, state colleges, and state universities. [Educational Property] (e) Buildings, land, equipment, and securities used exclusively for edu-cational purposes by a nonprofit institution of higher education. [Church Property] (f) Buildings, land on which they are situated, and equipment used ex-clusively for religious worship. [Cemetery Property] (g) Property used or held exclusively for the permanent deposit of hu-man dead or for the care and maintenance of the property or the dead, ex-cept when used or held for profit. This property is also exempt from spe-cial assessment. [Growing Crops] (h) Growing crops. [Fruit and Nut Trees] (i) Fruit and nut trees until 4 years after the season in which they were planted in orchard form and grape vines until 3 years after the season in which they were planted in vineyard form. [Timber Exemption] (j) Immature forest trees planted on lands not previously bearing mer-chantable timber or planted or of natural growth on lands from which the merchantable original growth timber stand to the extent of 70 percent of all trees over 16 inches in diameter has been removed. Forest trees or tim-ber shall be considered mature at such time after 40 years from the time of planting or removal of the original timber when so declared by a majority vote of a board consisting of a representative from the State Board of For-estry, a representative from the State Board of Equalization, and the asses-sor of the county in which the trees are located. The Legislature may supersede the foregoing provisions with an alterna-tive system or systems of taxing or exempting forest trees or timber, in-cluding a taxation system not based on property valuation. Any alternative system or systems shall provide for exemption of unharvested immature trees, shall encourage the continued use of timberlands for the production of trees for timber products, and shall provide for restricting the use of timberland to the production of timber products and compatible uses with provisions for taxation of timberland based on the restrictions. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to exclude timberland from the provi-sions of Section 8 of this article. [Homeowners’ Exemption] (k) $7,000 of the full value of a dwelling, as defined by the Legislature, when occupied by an owner as his principal residence, unless the dwelling is receiving another real property exemption. The Legislature may in-crease this exemption and may deny it if the owner received state or local aid to pay taxes either in whole or in part, and either directly or indirectly, on the dwelling. No increase in this exemption above the amount of $7,000 shall be effec-tive for any fiscal year unless the Legislature increases the rate of state taxes in an amount suffcient to provide the subventions required by Sec-tion 25. If the Legislature increases the homeowners’ property tax exemption, it shall provide increases in benefits to qualified renters, as defined by law, comparable to the average increase in benefits to homeowners, as calcu-lated by the Legislature. [Vessels] (l) Vessels of more than 50 tons burden in this State and engaged in the transportation of freight or passengers. [Household Furnishings—Personal Effects] (m) Household furnishings and personal effects not held or used in con-nection with a trade, profession, or business. [Debt Secured by Land] (n) Any debt secured by land. [Veterans’ Exemptions] (o) Property in the amount of $1,000 of a claimant who— (1) is serving in or has served in and has been discharged under honor-able conditions from service in the United States Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Coast Guard, or Revenue Marine (Revenue Cutter) Service; and— (2) served either (i) in time of war, or (ii) in time of peace in a campaign or expedition for which a medal has been issued by Congress, or (iii) in time of peace and because of a service-connected disability was released from active duty; and— (3) resides in the State on the current lien date. An unmarried person who owns property valued at $5,000 or more, or a married person, who, together with the spouse, owns property valued at $10,000 or more, is ineligible for this exemption. If the claimant is married and does not own property eligible for the full amount of the exemption, property of the spouse shall be eligible for the unused balance of the exemption. [Veterans’ Exemptions] (p) Property in the amount of $1,000 of a claimant who— (1) is the unmarried spouse of a deceased veteran who met the service requirement stated in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection 3(o), and (2) does not own property in excess of $10,000, and (3) is a resident of the State on the current lien date. [Veterans’ Exemptions] (q) Property in the amount of $1,000 of a claimant who— (1) is the parent of a deceased veteran who met the service requirement stated in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection 3(o), and (2) receives a pension because of the veteran’s service, and (3) is a resident of the State on the current lien date. Either parent of a deceased veteran may claim this exemption. An unmarried person who owns property valued at $5,000 or more, or a married person, who, together with the spouse, owns property valued at $10,000 or more, is ineligible for this exemption. [Veterans’ Exemptions] (r) No individual residing in the State on the effective date of this amend-ment who would have been eligible for the exemption provided by the pre-vious section 1 of this article had it not been repealed shall lose eligibil-ity for the exemption as a result of this amendment. [As amended November 8, 1988.] [Veterans’ Exemptions—Change in Assessment Ratio—Adjustment] SEC. 3.5. In any year in which the assessment ratio is changed, the Legislature shall adjust the valuation of assessable property described in subdivisions (o), (p) and (q) of Section 3 of this article to maintain the same proportionate values of such property. [New section adopted Novem-ber 6, 1979.] [Property Tax Exemption] SEC. 4. The Legislature may exempt from property taxation in whole or in part: [Home of Veteran or Surviving Spouse] (a) The home of a person or a person’s spouse, including an unmarried surviving spouse, if the person, because of injury incurred in military ser-vice, is blind in both eyes, has lost the use of 2 or more limbs, or is totally disabled, or if the person has, as a result of a service-connected injury or disease, died while on active duty in military service, unless the home is receiving another real property exemption. [Religious, Hospital and Charitable Property] (b) Property used exclusively for religious, hospital, or charitable pur-poses and owned or held in trust by corporations or other entities (1) that are organized and operating for those purposes, (2) that are nonprofit, and (3) no part of whose net earnings inures to the benefit of any private share-holder or individual. [Specifc College Exemptions] (c) Property owned by the California School of Mechanical Arts, Cali-fornia Academy of Sciences, or Cogswell Polytechnical College, or held in trust for the Huntington Library and Art Gallery, or their successors. [Church Parking Lots] (d) Real property not used for commercial purposes that is reasonably and necessarily required for parking vehicles of persons worshipping on land exempt by Section 3(f). [As amended November 3, 1992.] [Exemption of Buildings Under Construction] SEC. 5. Exemptions granted or authorized by Sections 3(e), 3(f), and 4(b) apply to buildings under construction, land required for their conve-nient use, and equipment in them if the intended use would qualify the property for exemption. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 6. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 6, below.] [Exemption Waivers] SEC. 6. The failure in any year to claim, in a manner required by the laws in effect at the time the claim is required to be made, an exemption or classifcation which reduces a property tax shall be deemed a waiver of the exemption or classifcation for that year. [New section adopted Novem-ber 5, 1974.] SEC. 7. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 7, below.] [Real Property Taxes—Exemption by County Boards of Supervisors] SEC. 7. The Legislature, two-thirds of the membership of each house concurring, may authorize county boards of supervisors to exempt real property having a full value so low that, if not exempt, the total taxes and applicable subventions on the property would amount to less than the cost of assessing and collecting them. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Open Space Land and Historical Property—Exemption] SEC. 8. To promote the conservation, preservation and continued exis-tence of open space lands, the Legislature may define open space land and shall provide that when this land is enforceably restricted, in a manner specified by the Legislature, to recreation, enjoyment of scenic beauty, use or conservation of natural resources, or production of food or fber, it shall be valued for property tax purposes only on a basis that is consistent with its restrictions and uses. To promote the preservation of property of historical signifcance, the Legislature may define such property and shall provide that when it is en-forceably restricted, in a manner specified by the Legislature, it shall be valued for property tax purposes only on a basis that is consistent with its restrictions and uses. [As amended June 8, 1976.] [Postponement of Property Taxes] SEC. 8.5. The Legislature may provide by law for the manner in which a person of low or moderate income who is 62 years of age or older may postpone ad valorem property taxes on the dwelling owned and occupied by him or her as his or her principal place of residence. The Legislature may also provide by law for the manner in which a disabled person may postpone payment of ad valorem property taxes on the dwelling owned and occupied by him or her as his or her principal place of residence. The Legislature shall have plenary power to define all terms in this section. The Legislature shall provide by law for subventions to counties, cities and counties, cities and districts in an amount equal to the amount of rev-enue lost by each by reason of the postponement of taxes and for the reim-bursement to the State of subventions from the payment of postponed tax-es. Provision shall be made for the inclusion of reimbursement for the payment of interest on, and any costs to the State incurred in connection with, the subventions. [As amended November 6, 1984.] SEC. 9. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 9, below.] [Valuation of Certain Homes] SEC. 9. The Legislature may provide for the assessment for taxation only on the basis of use of a single-family dwelling, as defined by the Leg-islature, and so much of the land as is required for its convenient use and occupation, when the dwelling is occupied by an owner and located on land zoned exclusively for single-family dwellings or for agricultural pur-poses. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 9a. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 9.5. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 10. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 10, below.] [Golf Course Values] SEC. 10. Real property in a parcel of 10 or more acres which, on the lien date and for 2 or more years immediately preceding, has been used exclusively for nonprofit golf course purposes shall be assessed for taxa-tion on the basis of such use, plus any value attributable to mines, quarries, hydrocarbon substances, or other minerals in the property or the right to extract hydrocarbons or other minerals from the property. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 10. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 11. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 11, below.] [Taxation of Local Government Real Property] SEC. 11. (a) Lands owned by a local government that are outside its boundaries, including rights to use or divert water from surface or under-ground sources and any other interests in lands, are taxable if (1) they are located in Inyo or Mono County and (a) they were assessed for taxation to the local government in Inyo County as of the 1966 lien date, or in Mono County as of the 1967 lien date, whether or not the assessment was valid when made, or (b) they were acquired by the local government subsequent to that lien date and were assessed to a prior owner as of that lien date and each lien date thereafter, or (2) they are located outside Inyo or Mono County and were taxable when acquired by the local government. Im-provements owned by a local government that are outside its boundaries are taxable if they were taxable when acquired or were constructed by the local government to replace improvements which were taxable when ac-quired. (b) Taxable land belonging to a local government and located in Inyo County shall be assessed in any year subsequent to 1968 at the place where it was assessed as of the 1966 lien date and in an amount derived by mul-tiplying its 1966 assessed value by the ratio of the statewide per capita as-sessed value of land as of the last lien date prior to the current lien date to $766, using civilian population only. Taxable land belonging to a local government and located in Mono County shall be assessed in any year subsequent to 1968 at the place where it was assessed as of the 1967 lien date and in an amount determined by the preceding formula except that the 1967 lien date, the 1967 assessed value, and the fgure $856 shall be used in the formula. Taxable land belonging to a local government and located outside of Inyo and Mono counties shall be assessed at the place where located and in an amount that does not exceed the lower of (1) its fair mar-ket value times the prevailing percentage of fair market value at which other lands are assessed and (2) a fgure derived in the manner specified in this Section for land located in Mono County. If land acquired by a local government after the lien date of the base year specified in this Section was assessed in the base year as part of a larger parcel, the assessed value of the part in the base year shall be that fraction of the assessed value of the larger parcel that the area of the part is of the area of the larger parcel. If a local government divests itself of ownership of land without water rights and this land was assessed in Inyo County as of the 1966 lien date or in Mono County as of the 1967 lien date, the divestment shall not dimin-ish the quantity of water rights assessable and taxable at the place where assessed as of that lien date. (c) In the event the Legislature changes the prevailing percentage of fair market value at which land is assessed for taxation, there shall be used in the computations required by Section 11(b) of this Article, for the first year for which the new percentage is applicable, in lieu of the statewide per capita assessed value of land as of the last lien date prior to the current lien date, the statewide per capita assessed value of land on the prior lien date times the ratio of the new prevailing percentage of fair market value to the previous prevailing percentage. (d) If, after March 1954, a taxable improvement is replaced while owned by and in possession of a local government, the replacement improvement shall be assessed, as long as it is owned by a local government, as other improvements are except that the assessed value shall not exceed the prod-uct of (1) the percentage at which privately owned improvements are as-sessed times (2) the highest full value ever used for taxation of the im-provement that has been replaced. For purposes of this calculation, the full value for any year prior to 1967 shall be conclusively presumed to be 4 times the assessed value in that year. (e) No tax, charge, assessment, or levy of any character, other than those taxes authorized by Sections 11(a) to 11(d), inclusive, of this Article, shall be imposed upon one local government by another local government that is based or calculated upon the consumption or use of water outside the boundaries of the government imposing it. (f) Any taxable interest of any character, other than a lease for agricul-tural purposes and an interest of a local government, in any land owned by a local government that is subject to taxation pursuant to Section 11(a) of this Article shall be taxed in the same manner as other taxable interests. The aggregate value of all the interests subject to taxation pursuant to Sec-tion 11(a), however, shall not exceed the value of all interests in the land less the taxable value of the interest of any local government ascertained as provided in Sections 11(a) to 11(e), inclusive, of this Article. (g) Any assessment made pursuant to Sections 11(a) to 11(d), inclusive, of this Article shall be subject to review, equalization, and adjustment by the State Board of Equalization, but an adjustment shall conform to the provisions of these Sections. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Unsecured Property Tax Rate] SEC. 12. (a) Except as provided in subdivision (b), taxes on personal property, possessory interests in land, and taxable improvements located on land exempt from taxation which are not a lien upon land suffcient in value to secure their payment shall be levied at the rates for the preceding tax year upon property of the same kind where the taxes were a lien upon land suffcient in value to secure their payment. (b) In any year in which the assessment ratio is changed, the Legislature shall adjust the rate described in subdivision (a) to maintain equality be-tween property on the secured and unsecured rolls. [As amended Novem-ber 2, 1976.] SEC. 12¾. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 13. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 13, below.] [Separate Land and Improvements Assessment] SEC. 13. Land and improvements shall be separately assessed. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 14. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 14, below.] [Tax Situs] SEC. 14. All property taxed by local government shall be assessed in the county, city, and district in which it is situated. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 144⁄5. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 15. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 15, below.] [Disaster Relief] SEC. 15. The Legislature may authorize local government to provide for the assessment or reassessment of taxable property physically dam-aged or destroyed after the lien date to which the assessment or reassess-ment relates. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 16. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 16, below.] [County Board of Equalization—Assessment Appeals Board] SEC. 16. The county board of supervisors, or one or more assessment appeals boards created by the county board of supervisors, shall constitute the county board of equalization for a county. Two or more county boards of supervisors may jointly create one or more assessment appeals boards which shall constitute the county board of equalization for each of the par-ticipating counties. Except as provided in subdivision (g) of Section 11, the county board of equalization, under such rules of notice as the county board may prescribe, shall equalize the values of all property on the local assessment roll by ad-justing individual assessments. County boards of supervisors shall fx the compensation for members of assessment appeals boards, furnish clerical and other assistance for those boards, adopt rules of notice and procedures for those boards as may be required to facilitate their work and to insure uniformity in the processing and decision of equalization petitions, and may provide for their discon-tinuance. The Legislature shall provide for: (a) the number and qualifcations of members of assessment appeals boards, the manner of selecting, appoint-ing, and removing them, and the terms for which they serve, and (b) the procedure by which two or more county boards of supervisors may jointly create one or more assessment appeals boards. [New section adopted No-vember 5, 1974.] [Board of Equalization] SEC. 17. The Board of Equalization consists of 5 voting members: the Controller and 4 members elected for 4-year terms at gubernatorial elec-tions. The State shall be divided into four Board of Equalization districts with the voters of each district electing one member. No member may serve more than 2 terms. [As amended November 6, 1990. Initiative mea-sure.] SEC. 18. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 18, below.] [Intercounty Equalization] SEC. 18. The Board shall measure county assessment levels annually and shall bring those levels into conformity by adjusting entire secured lo-cal assessment rolls. In the event a property tax is levied by the State, how-ever, the effects of unequalized local assessment levels, to the extent any remain after such adjustments, shall be corrected for purposes of distribut-ing this tax by equalizing the assessment levels of locally and state-as-sessed properties and varying the rate of the state tax inversely with the counties’ respective assessment levels. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 19. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 19, below.] [State Assessment] SEC. 19. The Board shall annually assess (1) pipelines, fumes, canals, ditches, and aqueducts lying within 2 or more counties and (2) property, except franchises, owned or used by regulated railway, telegraph, or tele-phone companies, car companies operating on railways in the State, and companies transmitting or selling gas or electricity. This property shall be subject to taxation to the same extent and in the same manner as other property. No other tax or license charge may be imposed on these companies which differs from that imposed on mercantile, manufacturing, and other business corporations. This restriction does not release a utility company from payments agreed on or required by law for a special privilege or fran-chise granted by a government body. The Legislature may authorize Board assessment of property owned or used by other public utilities. The Board may delegate to a local assessor the duty to assess a property used but not owned by a state assessee on which the taxes are to be paid by a local assessee. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 20. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 20, below.] [Maximum Tax Rates—Bonding Limits] SEC. 20. The Legislature may provide maximum property tax rates and bonding limits for local governments. [New section adopted Novem-ber 5, 1974.] SEC. 21. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 21, below.] [School District Tax] SEC. 21. Within such limits as may be provided under Section 20 of this Article, the Legislature shall provide for an annual levy by county governing bodies of school district taxes suffcient to produce annual rev-enues for each district that the district’s board determines are required for its schools and district functions. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 21.5. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 22. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 22, below.] [State Property Tax Limitations] SEC. 22. Not more than 25 percent of the total appropriations from all funds of the State shall be raised by means of taxes on real and personal property according to the value thereof. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 23. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 23, below.] [State Boundary Change] SEC. 23. If state boundaries change, the Legislature shall determine how property affected shall be taxed. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 24. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 24, below.] [State Taxes for Local Purposes] SEC. 24. (a) The Legislature may not impose taxes for local purposes but may authorize local governments to impose them. (b) The Legislature may not reallocate, transfer, borrow, appropriate, restrict the use of, or otherwise use the proceeds of any tax imposed or levied by a local government solely for the local government’s purposes. [State Funds for Local Purposes] (c) Money appropriated from state funds to a local government for its local purposes may be used as provided by law. [Subventions] (d) Money subvened to a local government under Section 25 may be used for state or local purposes. [As amended November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] SEC. 25. [Repealed November 5, 1974. See Section 25, below.] [Homeowners’ Exemption, Reimbursement of Local Government] SEC. 25. The Legislature shall provide, in the same fiscal year, reim-bursements to each local government for revenue lost because of Section 3(k). [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Ad Valorem Property Tax Revenue Allocations] SEC. 25.5. (a) On or after November 3, 2004, the Legislature shall not enact a statute to do any of the following: (1) (A) Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (B), modify the manner in which ad valorem property tax revenues are allocated in accor-dance with subdivision (a) of Section 1 of Article XIIIA so as to reduce for any fiscal year the percentage of the total amount of ad valorem property tax revenues in a county that is allocated among all of the local agencies in that county below the percentage of the total amount of those revenues that would be allocated among those agencies for the same fiscal year un-der the statutes in effect on November 3, 2004. For purposes of this sub-paragraph, “percentage” does not include any property tax revenues refer-enced in paragraph (2). (B) In the 2009–10 fiscal year only, and except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (C), subparagraph (A) may be suspended for that fiscal year if all of the following conditions are met: (i) The Governor issues a proclamation that declares that, due to a se-vere state fiscal hardship, the suspension of subparagraph (A) is necessary. (ii) The Legislature enacts an urgency statute, pursuant to a bill passed in each house of the Legislature by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring, that contains a suspension of subparagraph (A) for that fiscal year and does not contain any other provi-sion. (iii) No later than the effective date of the statute described in clause (ii), a statute is enacted that provides for the full repayment to local agencies of the total amount of revenue losses, including interest as provided by law, resulting from the modifcation of ad valorem property tax revenue allocations to local agencies. This full repayment shall be made not later than the end of the third fiscal year immediately following the fiscal year to which the modifcation applies. (C) A suspension of subparagraph (A) shall not result in a total ad va-lorem property tax revenue loss to all local agencies within a county that exceeds 8 percent of the total amount of ad valorem property tax revenues that were allocated among all local agencies within that county for the fs-cal year immediately preceding the fiscal year for which subparagraph (A) is suspended. (2) (A) Except as otherwise provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), re-strict the authority of a city, county, or city and county to impose a tax rate under, or change the method of distributing revenues derived under, the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law set forth in Part 1.5 (commencing with Section 7200) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxa-tion Code, as that law read on November 3, 2004. The restriction imposed by this subparagraph also applies to the entitlement of a city, county, or city and county to the change in tax rate resulting from the end of the rev-enue exchange period, as defined in Section 7203.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as that section read on November 3, 2004. (B) The Legislature may change by statute the method of distributing the revenues derived under a use tax imposed pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law to allow the State to partici-pate in an interstate compact or to comply with federal law. (C) The Legislature may authorize by statute two or more specifcally identifed local agencies within a county, with the approval of the govern-ing body of each of those agencies, to enter into a contract to exchange allocations of ad valorem property tax revenues for revenues derived from a tax rate imposed under the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law. The exchange under this subparagraph of revenues derived from a tax rate imposed under that law shall not require voter approval for the continued imposition of any portion of an existing tax rate from which those revenues are derived. (3) Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (C) of paragraph (2), change for any fiscal year the pro rata shares in which ad valorem prop-erty tax revenues are allocated among local agencies in a county other than pursuant to a bill passed in each house of the Legislature by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring. The Leg-islature shall not change the pro rata shares of ad valorem property tax pursuant to this paragraph, nor change the allocation of the revenues de-scribed in Section 15 of Article XI, to reimburse a local government when the Legislature or any state agency mandates a new program or higher level of service on that local government. (4) Extend beyond the revenue exchange period, as defined in Section 7203.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as that section read on Novem-ber 3, 2004, the suspension of the authority, set forth in that section on that date, of a city, county, or city and county to impose a sales and use tax rate under the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law. (5) Reduce, during any period in which the rate authority suspension described in paragraph (4) is operative, the payments to a city, county, or city and county that are required by Section 97.68 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as that section read on November 3, 2004. (6) Restrict the authority of a local entity to impose a transactions and use tax rate in accordance with the Transactions and Use Tax Law (Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxa-tion Code), or change the method for distributing revenues derived under a transaction and use tax rate imposed under that law, as it read on Novem-ber 3, 2004. (7) Require a community redevelopment agency (A) to pay, remit, loan, or otherwise transfer, directly or indirectly, taxes on ad valorem real prop-erty and tangible personal property allocated to the agency pursuant to Section 16 of Article XVI to or for the benefit of the State, any agency of the State, or any jurisdiction; or (B) to use, restrict, or assign a particular purpose for such taxes for the benefit of the State, any agency of the State, or any jurisdiction, other than (i) for making payments to affected taxing agencies pursuant to Sections 33607.5 and 33607.7 of the Health and Safety Code or similar statutes requiring such payments, as those statutes read on January 1, 2008, or (ii) for the purpose of increasing, improving, and preserving the supply of low and moderate income housing available at affordable housing cost. (b) For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: (1) “Ad valorem property tax revenues” means all revenues derived from the tax collected by a county under subdivision (a) of Section 1 of Article XIIIA, regardless of any of this revenue being otherwise classifed by statute. (2) “Local agency” has the same meaning as specified in Section 95 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as that section read on November 3, 2004. (3) “Jurisdiction” has the same meaning as specified in Section 95 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as that section read on November 3, 2004. [As amended November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Income Tax] SEC. 26. (a) Taxes on or measured by income may be imposed on per-sons, corporations, or other entities as prescribed by law. (b) Interest on bonds issued by the State or a local government in the State is exempt from taxes on income. (c) Income of a nonprofit educational institution of collegiate grade within the State of California is exempt from taxes on or measured by in-come if both of the following conditions are met: (1) The income is not unrelated business income as defined by the Leg-islature. (2) The income is used exclusively for educational purposes. (d) A nonprofit organization that is exempted from taxation by Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 23701) of Part 11 of Division 2 of the Rev-enue and Taxation Code or Subchapter F (commencing with Section 501) of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or the successor of either, is exempt from any business license tax or fee mea-sured by income or gross receipts that is levied by a county or city, wheth-er charter or general law, a city and county, a school district, a special dis-trict, or any other local agency. [As amended June 7, 1994.] [Bank and Corporation Taxes] SEC. 27. The Legislature, a majority of the membership of each house concurring, may tax corporations, including state and national banks, and their franchises by any method not prohibited by this Constitution or the Constitution or laws of the United States. Unless otherwise provided by the Legislature, the tax on state and national banks shall be according to or measured by their net income and shall be in lieu of all other taxes and li-cense fees upon banks or their shares, except taxes upon real property and vehicle registration and license fees. [As amended June 8, 1976.] [Taxation of Insurance Companies] SEC. 28. (a) “Insurer,” as used in this section, includes insurance com-panies or associations and reciprocal or interinsurance exchanges together with their corporate or other attorneys in fact considered as a single unit, and the State Compensation Insurance Fund. As used in this paragraph, “companies” includes persons, partnerships, joint stock associations, com-panies and corporations. (b) An annual tax is hereby imposed on each insurer doing business in this State on the base, at the rates, and subject to the deductions from the tax hereinafter specified. (c) In the case of an insurer not transacting title insurance in this State, the “basis of the annual tax” is, in respect to each year, the amount of gross premiums, less return premiums, received in such year by such insurer upon its business done in this State, other than premiums received for re-insurance and for ocean marine insurance. In the case of an insurer transacting title insurance in this State, the “ba-sis of the annual tax” is, in respect to each year, all income upon business done in this State, except: (1) Interest and dividends. (2) Rents from real property. (3) profits from the sale or other disposition of investments. (4) Income from investments. “Investments” as used in this subdivision includes property acquired by such insurer in the settlement or adjustment of claims against it but ex-cludes investments in title plants and title records. Income derived directly or indirectly from the use of title plants and title records is included in the basis of the annual tax. In the case of an insurer transacting title insurance in this State which has a trust department and does a trust business under the banking laws of this State, there shall be excluded from the basis of the annual tax imposed by this section, the income of, and from the assets of, such trust department and such trust business, if such income is taxed by this State or included in the measure of any tax imposed by this State. (d) The rate of the tax to be applied to the basis of the annual tax in re-spect to each year is 2.35 percent. (f) The tax imposed on insurers by this section is in lieu of all other taxes and licenses, state, county, and municipal, upon such insurers and their property, except: (1) Taxes upon their real estate. (2) That an insurer transacting title insurance in this State which has a trust department or does a trust business under the banking laws of this State is subject to taxation with respect to such trust department or trust business to the same extent and in the same manner as trust companies and the trust departments of banks doing business in this State. (3) When by or pursuant to the laws of any other state or foreign country any taxes, licenses and other fees, in the aggregate, and any fnes, penal-ties, deposit requirements or other material obligations, prohibitions or restrictions are or would be imposed upon California insurers, or upon the agents or representatives of such insurers, which are in excess of such tax-es, licenses and other fees, in the aggregate, or which are in excess of the fnes, penalties, deposit requirements or other obligations, prohibitions, or restrictions directly imposed upon similar insurers, or upon the agents or representatives of such insurers, of such other state or country under the statutes of this State; so long as such laws of such other state or country continue in force or are so applied, the same taxes, licenses and other fees, in the aggregate, or fnes, penalties or deposit requirements or other mate-rial obligations, prohibitions, or restrictions, of whatever kind shall be im-posed upon the insurers, or upon the agents or representatives of such in-surers, of such other state or country doing business or seeking to do business in California. Any tax, license or other fee or other obligation imposed by any city, county, or other political subdivision or agency of such other state or country on California insurers or their agents or repre-sentatives shall be deemed to be imposed by such state or country within the meaning of this paragraph (3) of subdivision (f). The provisions of this paragraph (3) of subdivision (f) shall not apply as to personal income taxes, nor as to ad valorem taxes on real or personal property nor as to special purpose obligations or assessments heretofore imposed by another state or foreign country in connection with particular kinds of insurance, other than property insurance; except that deductions, from premium taxes or other taxes otherwise payable, allowed on account of real estate or personal property taxes paid shall be taken into consider-ation in determining the propriety and extent of retaliatory action under this paragraph (3) of subdivision (f). For the purposes of this paragraph (3) of subdivision (f) the domicile of an alien insurer, other than insurers formed under the laws of Canada, shall be that state in which is located its principal place of business in the Unit-ed States. In the case of an insurer formed under the laws of Canada or a province thereof, its domicile shall be deemed to be that province in which its head office is situated. The provisions of this paragraph (3) of subdivision (f) shall also be ap-plicable to reciprocals or interinsurance exchanges and fraternal benefit societies. (4) The tax on ocean marine insurance. (5) Motor vehicle and other vehicle registration license fees and any other tax or license fee imposed by the State upon vehicles, motor vehicles or the operation thereof. (6) That each corporate or other attorney in fact of a reciprocal or inter-insurance exchange shall be subject to all taxes imposed upon corpora-tions or others doing business in the State, other than taxes on income de-rived from its principal business as attorney in fact. A corporate or other attorney in fact of each exchange shall annually compute the amount of tax that would be payable by it under prevailing law except for the provisions of this section, and any management fee due from each exchange to its corporate or other attorney in fact shall be re-duced pro tanto by a sum equivalent to the amount so computed. (g) Every insurer transacting the business of ocean marine insurance in this State shall annually pay to the State a tax measured by that proportion of the underwriting profit of such insurer from such insurance written in the United States, which the gross premiums of the insurer from such in-surance written in this State bear to the gross premiums of the insurer from such insurance written within the United States, at the rate of 5 per cen-tum, which tax shall be in lieu of all other taxes and licenses, state, county and municipal, upon such insurer, except taxes upon real estate, and such other taxes as may be assessed or levied against such insurer on account of any other class of insurance written by it. The Legislature shall define the terms “ocean marine insurance” and “underwriting profit,” and shall pro-vide for the assessment, levy, collection and enforcement of the ocean ma-rine tax. (h) The taxes provided for by this section shall be assessed by the State Board of Equalization. (i) The Legislature, a majority of all the members elected to each of the two houses voting in favor thereof, may by law change the rate or rates of taxes herein imposed upon insurers. (j) This section is not intended to and does not change the law as it has previously existed with respect to the meaning of the words “gross premi-ums, less return premiums, received” as used in this article. [As amended June 8, 1976.] [Local Government Tax Sharing] SEC. 29. (a) The Legislature may authorize counties, cities and coun-ties, and cities to enter into contracts to apportion between them the reve-nue derived from any sales or use tax imposed by them that is collected for them by the State. Before the contract becomes operative, it shall be au-thorized by a majority of those voting on the question in each jurisdiction at a general or direct primary election. (b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), on and after the operative date of this subdivision, counties, cities and counties, and cities may enter into contracts to apportion between them the revenue derived from any sales or use tax imposed by them pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law, or any successor provisions, that is collected for them by the State, if the ordinance or resolution proposing each contract is approved by a two-thirds vote of the governing body of each jurisdiction that is a party to the contract. [As amended November 3, 1998.] [Tax Liens—Presumption of Payment of Taxes] SEC. 30. Every tax shall be conclusively presumed to have been paid after 30 years from the time it became a lien unless the property subject to the lien has been sold in the manner provided by the Legislature for the payment of the tax. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Power to Tax] SEC. 31. The power to tax may not be surrendered or suspended by grant or contract. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Proceedings Relating to Collection] SEC. 32. No legal or equitable process shall issue in any proceeding in any court against this State or any officer thereof to prevent or enjoin the collection of any tax. After payment of a tax claimed to be illegal, an ac-tion may be maintained to recover the tax paid, with interest, in such man-ner as may be provided by the Legislature. [New section adopted Novem-ber 5, 1974.] [Legislature to Enact Laws] SEC. 33. The Legislature shall pass all laws necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Food Products—Taxation] SEC. 34. Neither the State of California nor any of its political subdivi-sions shall levy or collect a sales or use tax on the sale of, or the storage, use or other consumption in this State of food products for human con-sumption except as provided by statute as of the effective date of this sec-tion. [New section adopted November 3, 1992. Operative January 1, 1993. Initiative measure.] [Local Public Safety Services] SEC. 35. (a) The people of the State of California find and declare all of the following: (1) Public safety services are critically important to the security and well-being of the State’s citizens and to the growth and revitalization of the State’s economic base. (2) The protection of the public safety is the first responsibility of local government and local officials have an obligation to give priority to the provision of adequate public safety services. (3) In order to assist local government in maintaining a suffcient level of public safety services, the proceeds of the tax enacted pursuant to this section shall be designated exclusively for public safety. (b) In addition to any sales and use taxes imposed by the Legislature, the following sales and use taxes are hereby imposed: (1) For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers at the rate of  percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this State on and after January 1, 1994. (2) An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other con-sumption in this State of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after January 1, 1994, for storage, use, or other consump-tion in this State at the rate of  percent of the sales price of the property. (c) The Sales and Use Tax Law, including any amendments made there-to on or after the effective date of this section, shall be applicable to the taxes imposed by subdivision (b). (d) (1) All revenues, less refunds, derived from the taxes imposed pur-suant to subdivision (b) shall be transferred to the Local Public Safety Fund for allocation by the Legislature, as prescribed by statute, to counties in which either of the following occurs: (A) The board of supervisors, by a majority vote of its membership, re-quests an allocation from the Local Public Safety Fund in a manner pre-scribed by statute. (B) A majority of the county’s voters voting thereon approve the addi-tion of this section. (2) Moneys in the Local Public Safety Fund shall be allocated for use exclusively for public safety services of local agencies. (e) Revenues derived from the taxes imposed pursuant to subdivision (b) shall not be considered proceeds of taxes for purposes of Article XIII B or State General Fund proceeds of taxes within the meaning of Article XVI. (f) Except for the provisions of Section 34, this section shall supersede any other provisions of this Constitution that are in conflict with the provi-sions of this section, including, but not limited to, Section 9 of Article II. [New section adopted November 2, 1993.] [Protection of Schools and Local Public Safety—Temporary Income and Sales Tax Increases] SEC. 36. (a) For purposes of this section: (1) “Public Safety Services” includes the following: (A) Employing and training public safety officials, including law en-forcement personnel, attorneys assigned to criminal proceedings, and court security staff. (B) Managing local jails and providing housing, treatment, and services for, and supervision of, juvenile and adult offenders. (C) Preventing child abuse, neglect, or exploitation; providing services to children and youth who are abused, neglected, or exploited, or who are at risk of abuse, neglect, or exploitation, and the families of those children; providing adoption services; and providing adult protective services. (D) Providing mental health services to children and adults to reduce failure in school, harm to self or others, homelessness, and preventable in-carceration or institutionalization. (E) Preventing, treating, and providing recovery services for substance abuse. (2) “2011 Realignment Legislation” means legislation enacted on or be-fore September 30, 2012, to implement the state budget plan, that is enti-tled 2011 Realignment and provides for the assignment of Public Safety Services responsibilities to local agencies, including related reporting re-sponsibilities. The legislation shall provide local agencies with maximum fexibility and control over the design, administration, and delivery of Pub-lic Safety Services consistent with federal law and funding requirements, as determined by the Legislature. However, 2011 Realignment Legislation shall include no new programs assigned to local agencies after January 1, 2012, except for the early periodic screening, diagnosis, and treatment (EPSDT) program and mental health managed care. (b) (1) Except as provided in subdivision (d), commencing in the 2011–12 fiscal year and continuing thereafter, the following amounts shall be deposited into the Local Revenue Fund 2011, as established by Section 30025 of the Government Code, as follows: (A) All revenues, less refunds, derived from the taxes described in Sec-tions 6051.15 and 6201.15 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as those sections read on July 1, 2011. (B) All revenues, less refunds, derived from the vehicle license fees de-scribed in Section 11005 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as that sec-tion read on July 1, 2011. (2) On and after July 1, 2011, the revenues deposited pursuant to para-graph (1) shall not be considered General Fund revenues or proceeds of taxes for purposes of Section 8 of Article XVI of the California Constitu-tion. (c) (1) Funds deposited in the Local Revenue Fund 2011 are continu-ously appropriated exclusively to fund the provision of Public Safety Ser-vices by local agencies. Pending full implementation of the 2011 Realign-ment Legislation, funds may also be used to reimburse the State for program costs incurred in providing Public Safety Services on behalf of local agencies. The methodology for allocating funds shall be as specified in the 2011 Realignment Legislation. (2) The county treasurer, city and county treasurer, or other appropriate official shall create a County Local Revenue Fund 2011 within the trea-sury of each county or city and county. The money in each County Local Revenue Fund 2011 shall be exclusively used to fund the provision of Pub-lic Safety Services by local agencies as specified by the 2011 Realignment Legislation. (3) Notwithstanding Section 6 of Article XIII B, or any other constitu-tional provision, a mandate of a new program or higher level of service on a local agency imposed by the 2011 Realignment Legislation, or by any regulation adopted or any executive order or administrative directive is-sued to implement that legislation, shall not constitute a mandate requiring the State to provide a subvention of funds within the meaning of that sec-tion. Any requirement that a local agency comply with Chapter 9 (com-mencing with Section 54950) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Gov-ernment Code, with respect to performing its Public Safety Services responsibilities, or any other matter, shall not be a reimbursable mandate under Section 6 of Article XIII B. (4) (A) Legislation enacted after September 30, 2012, that has an over-all effect of increasing the costs already borne by a local agency for pro-grams or levels of service mandated by the 2011 Realignment Legislation shall apply to local agencies only to the extent that the State provides an-nual funding for the cost increase. Local agencies shall not be obligated to provide programs or levels of service required by legislation, described in this subparagraph, above the level for which funding has been provided. (B) Regulations, executive orders, or administrative directives, imple-mented after October 9, 2011, that are not necessary to implement the 2011 Realignment Legislation, and that have an overall effect of increas-ing the costs already borne by a local agency for programs or levels of ser-vice mandated by the 2011 Realignment Legislation, shall apply to local agencies only to the extent that the State provides annual funding for the cost increase. Local agencies shall not be obligated to provide programs or levels of service pursuant to new regulations, executive orders, or admin-istrative directives, described in this subparagraph, above the level for which funding has been provided. (C) Any new program or higher level of service provided by local agen-cies, as described in subparagraphs (A) and (B), above the level for which funding has been provided, shall not require a subvention of funds by the State nor otherwise be subject to Section 6 of Article XIII B. This para-graph shall not apply to legislation currently exempt from subvention un-der paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 6 of Article XIII B as that paragraph read on January 2, 2011. (D) The State shall not submit to the federal government any plans or waivers, or amendments to those plans or waivers, that have an overall ef-fect of increasing the cost borne by a local agency for programs or levels of service mandated by the 2011 Realignment Legislation, except to the extent that the plans, waivers, or amendments are required by federal law, or the State provides annual funding for the cost increase. (E) The State shall not be required to provide a subvention of funds pur-suant to this paragraph for a mandate that is imposed by the State at the request of a local agency or to comply with federal law. State funds re-quired by this paragraph shall be from a source other than those described in subdivisions (b) and (d), ad valorem property taxes, or the Social Ser-vices Subaccount of the Sales Tax Account of the Local Revenue Fund. (5) (A) For programs described in subparagraphs (C) to (E), inclusive, of paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) and included in the 2011 Realignment Legislation, if there are subsequent changes in federal statutes or regula-tions that alter the conditions under which federal matching funds as de-scribed in the 2011 Realignment Legislation are obtained, and have the overall effect of increasing the costs incurred by a local agency, the State shall annually provide at least 50 percent of the nonfederal share of those costs as determined by the State. (B) When the State is a party to any complaint brought in a federal ju-dicial or administrative proceeding that involves one or more of the pro-grams described in subparagraphs (C) to (E), inclusive, of paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) and included in the 2011 Realignment Legislation, and there is a settlement or judicial or administrative order that imposes a cost in the form of a monetary penalty or has the overall effect of increasing the costs already borne by a local agency for programs or levels of service mandated by the 2011 Realignment Legislation, the State shall annually provide at least 50 percent of the nonfederal share of those costs as deter-mined by the State. Payment by the State is not required if the State deter-mines that the settlement or order relates to one or more local agencies failing to perform a ministerial duty, failing to perform a legal obligation in good faith, or acting in a negligent or reckless manner. (C) The state funds provided in this paragraph shall be from funding sources other than those described in subdivisions (b) and (d), ad valorem property taxes, or the Social Services Subaccount of the Sales Tax Account of the Local Revenue Fund. (6) If the State or a local agency fails to perform a duty or obligation under this section or under the 2011 Realignment Legislation, an appropri-ate party may seek judicial relief. These proceedings shall have priority over all other civil matters. (7) The funds deposited into a County Local Revenue Fund 2011 shall be spent in a manner designed to maintain the State’s eligibility for federal matching funds, and to ensure compliance by the State with appli-cable federal standards governing the State’s provision of Public Safety Services. (8) The funds deposited into a County Local Revenue Fund 2011 shall not be used by local agencies to supplant other funding for Public Safety Services. (d) If the taxes described in subdivision (b) are reduced or cease to be operative, the State shall annually provide moneys to the Local Revenue Fund 2011 in an amount equal to or greater than the aggregate amount that otherwise would have been provided by the taxes described in subdivision (b). The method for determining that amount shall be described in the 2011 Realignment Legislation, and the State shall be obligated to provide that amount for so long as the local agencies are required to perform the Public Safety Services responsibilities assigned by the 2011 Realignment Legislation. If the State fails to annually appropriate that amount, the Con-troller shall transfer that amount from the General Fund in pro rata month-ly shares to the Local Revenue Fund 2011. Thereafter, the Controller shall disburse these amounts to local agencies in the manner directed by the 2011 Realignment Legislation. The state obligations under this subdivi-sion shall have a lower priority claim to General Fund money than the first priority for money to be set apart under Section 8 of Article XVI and the second priority to pay voter-approved debts and liabilities described in Section 1 of Article XVI. (e) (1) To ensure that public education is not harmed in the process of providing critical protection to local Public Safety Services, the Education Protection Account is hereby created in the General Fund to receive and disburse the revenues derived from the incremental increases in taxes im-posed by this section, as specified in subdivision (f). (2) (A) Before June 30, 2013, and before June 30 of each year from 2014 to 2030, inclusive, the Director of Finance shall estimate the total amount of additional revenues, less refunds, that will be derived from the incremental increases in tax rates made in subdivision (f) that will be avail-able for transfer into the Education Protection Account during the next fs-cal year. The Director of Finance shall make the same estimate by January 10, 2013, for additional revenues, less refunds, that will be received by the end of the 2012–13 fiscal year. (B) During the last 10 days of the quarter of each of the first three quar-ters of each fiscal year from 2013–14 to 2030–31, inclusive, the Controller shall transfer into the Education Protection Account one-fourth of the total amount estimated pursuant to subparagraph (A) for that fiscal year, except as this amount may be adjusted pursuant to subparagraph (D). (C) In each of the fiscal years from 2012–13 to 2032–33, inclusive, the Director of Finance shall calculate an adjustment to the Education Protec-tion Account, as specified by subparagraph (D), by adding together the following amounts, as applicable: (i) In the last quarter of each fiscal year from 2012–13 to 2030–31, in-clusive, the Director of Finance shall recalculate the estimate made for the fiscal year pursuant to subparagraph (A), and shall subtract from this up-dated estimate the amounts previously transferred to the Education Protec-tion Account for that fiscal year. (ii) In June 2015 and in every June from 2016 to 2033, inclusive, the Director of Finance shall make a fnal determination of the amount of ad-ditional revenues, less refunds, derived from the incremental increases in tax rates made in subdivision (f) for the fiscal year ending two years prior. The amount of the updated estimate calculated in clause (i) for the fiscal year ending two years prior shall be subtracted from the amount of this f-nal determination. (D) If the sum determined pursuant to subparagraph (C) is positive, the Controller shall transfer an amount equal to that sum into the Education Protection Account within 10 days preceding the end of the fiscal year. If that amount is negative, the Controller shall suspend or reduce subsequent quarterly transfers, if any, to the Education Protection Account until the total reduction equals the negative amount herein described. For purposes of any calculation made pursuant to clause (i) of subparagraph (C), the amount of a quarterly transfer shall not be modifed to refect any suspen-sion or reduction made pursuant to this subparagraph. (E) Before June 30, 2018, and before June 30 of each year from 2019 to 2030, inclusive, the Director of Finance shall estimate the amount of the additional revenues, less refunds, to be derived in the following fiscal year from the incremental increases in tax rates made in subdivision (f), that, when combined with all other available General Fund revenues, will be required to meet: (i) The minimum funding guarantee of Section 8 of Article XVI for that following fiscal year; and (ii) The workload budget for that following fiscal year, excluding any program expenditures already accounted for through clause (i). For pur-poses of this section, “workload budget” has the meaning set forth in Sec-tion 13308.05 of the Government Code, as that section read and was inter-preted by the Department of Finance on January 1, 2016, provided, however, that “currently authorized services” shall mean only those ser-vices that would have been considered “currently authorized services” un-der Section 13308.05 of the Government Code as of January 1, 2016. (F) In order to enhance the ability of all California school children and their families to receive regular, quality health care and thereby minimize school absenteeism due to health-related problems, whenever the Director of Finance estimates that the amount available for transfer into the Educa-tion Protection Account during the following fiscal year exceeds the amount of revenues required from that account pursuant to subparagraph (E) for that following fiscal year, the director shall identify the remaining amount. Fifty percent of that remainder, up to a maximum of two billion dollars in any single fiscal year, shall be allocated by the Controller from the Education Protection Account to the California Department of Health Care Services on a quarterly basis to increase funding for the existing health care programs and services described in Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 14000) to Chapter 8.9 (commencing with Section 14700), inclusive, of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. The funding shall be used only for critical, emergency, acute, and preventive health care services to children and their families, provided by health care professionals and health facilities that are licensed pursuant to Section 1250 of the Health and Safety Code, and to health plans or others that manage the provision of health care for Medi-Cal benefciaries that are contracting with the California Department of Health Care Services to provide health benefits pursuant to this section. (G) The allocation provided for in subparagraph (F) may be suspended by statute during a fiscal year in which a budget emergency has been de-clared, provided, however, that the allocation shall not be reduced beyond the proportional reduction in overall General Fund expenditures for that year. For purposes of this section, “budget emergency” has the same mean-ing as in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) of Section 22 of Article XVI. (H) The funding provided pursuant to subparagraph (F) shall not be used to supplant existing state General Funds for the nonfederal share of payments for those programs and, consistent with federal law, shall be used to obtain federal matching Medicaid funds. (3) All moneys in the Education Protection Account are hereby continu-ously appropriated for the support of school districts, county offices of education, charter schools, and community college districts as set forth in this paragraph, and for health care as set forth in subparagraph (F) of para-graph (2). (A) Eleven percent of the moneys appropriated for education pursuant to this paragraph shall be allocated quarterly by the Board of Governors of the California Community Colleges to community college districts to pro-vide general purpose funding to community college districts in proportion to the amounts determined pursuant to Section 84750.5 of the Education Code, as that code section read on November 6, 2012. The allocations cal-culated pursuant to this subparagraph shall be offset by the amounts spec-ifed in subdivisions (a), (c), and (d) of Section 84751 of the Education Code, as that section read on November 6, 2012, that are in excess of the amounts calculated pursuant to Section 84750.5 of the Education Code, as that section read on November 6, 2012, provided that no community col-lege district shall receive less than one hundred dollars ($100) per full time equivalent student. (B) Eighty-nine percent of the moneys appropriated for education pur-suant to this paragraph shall be allocated quarterly by the Superintendent of Public Instruction to provide general purpose funding to school dis-tricts, county offices of education, and state general-purpose funding to charter schools in proportion to the revenue limits calculated pursuant to Sections 2558 and 42238 of the Education Code and the amounts calcu-lated pursuant to Section 47633 of the Education Code for county offices of education, school districts, and charter schools, respectively, as those sections read on November 6, 2012. The amounts so calculated shall be offset by the amounts specified in subdivision (c) of Section 2558 of, para-graphs (1) through (7) of subdivision (h) of Section 42238 of, and Section 47635 of, the Education Code for county offices of education, school dis-tricts, and charter schools, respectively, as those sections read on Novem-ber 6, 2012, that are in excess of the amounts calculated pursuant to Sec-tions 2558, 42238, and 47633 of the Education Code for county offices of education, school districts, and charter schools, respectively, as those sec-tions read on November 6, 2012, provided that no school district, county office of education, or charter school shall receive less than two hundred dollars ($200) per unit of average daily attendance. (4) This subdivision is self-executing and requires no legislative action to take effect. Distribution of the moneys in the Education Protection Ac-count by the Board of Governors of the California Community Colleges and the Superintendent of Public Instruction shall not be delayed or other-wise affected by failure of the Legislature and Governor to enact an an-nual budget bill pursuant to Section 12 of Article IV, by invocation of sub-division (h) of Section 8 of Article XVI, or by any other action or failure to act by the Legislature or Governor. (5) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the moneys deposited in the Education Protection Account for education shall not be used to pay any costs incurred by the Legislature, the Governor, or any agency of state government. (6) A community college district, county office of education, school dis-trict, or charter school shall have sole authority to determine how the mon-eys received from the Education Protection Account are spent in the school or schools within its jurisdiction, provided, however, that the appropriate governing board or body shall make these spending determinations in open session of a public meeting of the governing board or body and shall not use any of the funds from the Education Protection Account for sala-ries or benefits of administrators or any other administrative costs. Each community college district, county office of education, school district, and charter school shall annually publish on its Internet Web site an accounting of how much money was received from the Education Protection Account and how that money was spent. (7) The annual independent fnancial and compliance audit required of community college districts, county offices of education, school districts, and charter schools shall, in addition to all other requirements of law, as-certain and verify whether the funds provided from the Education Protec-tion Account have been properly disbursed and expended as required by this section. Expenses incurred by those entities to comply with the addi-tional audit requirement of this section may be paid with funding from the Education Protection Account, and shall not be considered administrative costs for purposes of this section. (8) Revenues, less refunds, derived pursuant to subdivision (f) for de-posit in the Education Protection Account pursuant to this section shall be deemed “General Fund revenues,” “General Fund proceeds of taxes,” and “moneys to be applied by the State for the support of school districts and community college districts” for purposes of Section 8 of Article XVI. (f) (1) (A) In addition to the taxes imposed by Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, for the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers at the rate of  percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this State on and after January 1, 2013, and before January 1, 2017. (B) In addition to the taxes imposed by Part 1 (commencing with Sec-tion 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in this State of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after Jan-uary 1, 2013, and before January 1, 2017, for storage, use, or other con-sumption in this state at the rate of  percent of the sales price of the property. (C) The Sales and Use Tax Law, including any amendments enacted on or after the effective date of this section, shall apply to the taxes imposed pursuant to this paragraph. (D) This paragraph shall become inoperative on January 1, 2017. (2) For any taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2012, and be-fore January 1, 2031, with respect to the tax imposed pursuant to Section 17041 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the income tax bracket and the rate of 9.3 percent set forth in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of Section 17041 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall be modifed by each of the following: (A) (i) For that portion of taxable income that is over two hundred ffty thousand dollars ($250,000) but not over three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000), the tax rate is 10.3 percent of the excess over two hundred ffty thousand dollars ($250,000). (ii) For that portion of taxable income that is over three hundred thou-sand dollars ($300,000) but not over fve hundred thousand dollars ($500,000), the tax rate is 11.3 percent of the excess over three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000). (iii) For that portion of taxable income that is over fve hundred thou-sand dollars ($500,000), the tax rate is 12.3 percent of the excess over fve hundred thousand dollars ($500,000). (B) The income tax brackets specified in clauses (i), (ii), and (iii) of sub-paragraph (A) shall be recomputed, as otherwise provided in subdivision (h) of Section 17041 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, only for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2013. (C) (i) For purposes of subdivision (g) of Section 19136 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, this paragraph shall be considered to be chaptered on November 6, 2012. (ii) For purposes of Part 10 (commencing with Section 17001) of, and Part 10.2 (commencing with Section 18401) of, Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the modifed tax brackets and tax rates established and imposed by this paragraph shall be deemed to be established and imposed under Section 17041 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. (D) This paragraph shall become inoperative on December 1, 2031. (3) For any taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2012, and be-fore January 1, 2031, with respect to the tax imposed pursuant to Section 17041 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the income tax bracket and the rate of 9.3 percent set forth in paragraph (1) of subdivision (c) of Section 17041 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall be modifed by each of the following: (A) (i) For that portion of taxable income that is over three hundred forty thousand dollars ($340,000) but not over four hundred eight thou-sand dollars ($408,000), the tax rate is 10.3 percent of the excess over three hundred forty thousand dollars ($340,000). (ii) For that portion of taxable income that is over four hundred eight thousand dollars ($408,000) but not over six hundred eighty thousand dol-lars ($680,000), the tax rate is 11.3 percent of the excess over four hundred eight thousand dollars ($408,000). (iii) For that portion of taxable income that is over six hundred eighty thousand dollars ($680,000), the tax rate is 12.3 percent of the excess over six hundred eighty thousand dollars ($680,000). (B) The income tax brackets specified in clauses (i), (ii), and (iii) of sub-paragraph (A) shall be recomputed, as otherwise provided in subdivision (h) of Section 17041 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, only for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2013. (C) (i) For purposes of subdivision (g) of Section 19136 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, this paragraph shall be considered to be chaptered on November 6, 2012. (ii) For purposes of Part 10 (commencing with Section 17001) of, and Part 10.2 (commencing with Section 18401) of, Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the modifed tax brackets and tax rates established and imposed by this paragraph shall be deemed to be established and imposed under Section 17041 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. (D) This paragraph shall become inoperative on December 1, 2031. (g) (1) The Controller, pursuant to his or her statutory authority, may perform audits of expenditures from the Local Revenue Fund 2011 and any County Local Revenue Fund 2011, and shall audit the Education Pro-tection Account to ensure that those funds are used and accounted for in a manner consistent with this section. (2) The Attorney General or local district attorney shall expeditiously investigate, and may seek civil or criminal penalties for, any misuse of moneys from the County Local Revenue Fund 2011 or the Education Pro-tection Account. [As amended November 8, 2016. Initiative measure.] SEC. 37. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 37.5. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 38. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 39. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 40. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 41. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 42. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] SEC. 44. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] ARTICLE XIII A * TAX LIMITATION [Maximum Ad Valorem Tax on Real Property—Apportionment of Tax Revenues] SECTION 1. (a) The maximum amount of any ad valorem tax on real property shall not exceed One percent (1%) of the full cash value of such property. The one percent (1%) tax to be collected by the counties and ap-portioned according to law to the districts within the counties. [Exceptions to Limitation] (b) The limitation provided for in subdivision (a) shall not apply to ad valorem taxes or special assessments to pay the interest and redemption charges on any of the following: (1) Indebtedness approved by the voters prior to July 1, 1978. (2) Bonded indebtedness for the acquisition or improvement of real property approved on or after July 1, 1978, by two-thirds of the votes cast by the voters voting on the proposition. (3) Bonded indebtedness incurred by a school district, community col-lege district, or county office of education for the construction, reconstruc-tion, rehabilitation, or replacement of school facilities, including the fur-nishing and equipping of school facilities, or the acquisition or lease of real property for school facilities, approved by 55 percent of the voters of the district or county, as appropriate, voting on the proposition on or after the effective date of the measure adding this paragraph. This paragraph shall apply only if the proposition approved by the voters and resulting in the bonded indebtedness includes all of the following accountability re-quirements: (A) A requirement that the proceeds from the sale of the bonds be used only for the purposes specified in Article XIII A, Section 1(b)(3), and not for any other purpose, including teacher and administrator salaries and other school operating expenses. (B) A list of the specifc school facilities projects to be funded and cer-tifcation that the school district board, community college board, or coun- * New Article XIII A adopted June 6, 1978. Initiative measure. ty office of education has evaluated safety, class size reduction, and infor-mation technology needs in developing that list. (C) A requirement that the school district board, community college board, or county office of education conduct an annual, independent per-formance audit to ensure that the funds have been expended only on the specifc projects listed. (D) A requirement that the school district board, community college board, or county office of education conduct an annual, independent fnan-cial audit of the proceeds from the sale of the bonds until all of those pro-ceeds have been expended for the school facilities projects. (c) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law or of this Constitution, school districts, community college districts, and county offices of educa-tion may levy a 55 percent vote ad valorem tax pursuant to subdivision (b). [As amended November 7, 2000. Initiative measure.] [Valuation of Real Property—Appraised Value After 1975 Assessment—Replacement Dwelling] SEC. 2. (a) The “full cash value” means the county assessor’s valua-tion of real property as shown on the 1975–76 tax bill under “full cash value” or, thereafter, the appraised value of real property when purchased, newly constructed, or a change in ownership has occurred after the 1975 assessment. All real property not already assessed up to the 1975–76 full cash value may be reassessed to refect that valuation. For purposes of this section, “newly constructed” does not include real property that is recon-structed after a disaster, as declared by the Governor, where the fair market value of the real property, as reconstructed, is comparable to its fair market value prior to the disaster. For purposes of this section, the term “newly constructed” does not include that portion of an existing structure that con-sists of the construction or reconstruction of seismic retroftting compo-nents, as defined by the Legislature. However, the Legislature may provide that, under appropriate circum-stances and pursuant to definitions and procedures established by the Leg-islature, any person over the age of 55 years who resides in property that is eligible for the homeowner’s exemption under subdivision (k) of Sec-tion 3 of Article XIII and any implementing legislation may transfer the base year value of the property entitled to exemption, with the adjustments authorized by subdivision (b), to any replacement dwelling of equal or lesser value located within the same county and purchased or newly con-structed by that person as his or her principal residence within two years of the sale of the original property. For purposes of this section, “any per-son over the age of 55 years” includes a married couple one member of which is over the age of 55 years. For purposes of this section, “replace-ment dwelling” means a building, structure, or other shelter constituting a place of abode, whether real property or personal property, and any land on which it may be situated. For purposes of this section, a two-dwelling unit shall be considered as two separate single-family dwellings. This paragraph shall apply to any replacement dwelling that was purchased or newly constructed on or after November 5, 1986. In addition, the Legislature may authorize each county board of supervi-sors, after consultation with the local affected agencies within the county’s boundaries, to adopt an ordinance making the provisions of this subdivi-sion relating to transfer of base year value also applicable to situations in which the replacement dwellings are located in that county and the origi-nal properties are located in another county within this State. For purposes of this paragraph, “local affected agency” means any city, special district, school district, or community college district that receives an annual prop-erty tax revenue allocation. This paragraph applies to any replacement dwelling that was purchased or newly constructed on or after the date the county adopted the provisions of this subdivision relating to transfer of base year value, but does not apply to any replacement dwelling that was purchased or newly constructed before November 9, 1988. The Legislature may extend the provisions of this subdivision relating to the transfer of base year values from original properties to replacement dwellings of homeowners over the age of 55 years to severely disabled homeowners, but only with respect to those replacement dwellings pur-chased or newly constructed on or after the effective date of this para-graph. [Full Cash Value Refecting Infationary Rate] (b) The full cash value base may refect from year to year the infation-ary rate not to exceed 2 percent for any given year or reduction as shown in the consumer price index or comparable data for the area under taxing jurisdiction, or may be reduced to refect substantial damage, destruction, or other factors causing a decline in value. [“Newly Constructed”] (c) For purposes of subdivision (a), the Legislature may provide that the term “newly constructed” does not include any of the following: (1) The construction or addition of any active solar energy system. (2) The construction or installation of any fre sprinkler system, other fre extinguishing system, fre detection system, or fre-related egress im-provement, as defined by the Legislature, that is constructed or installed after the effective date of this paragraph. (3) The construction, installation, or modifcation on or after the effec-tive date of this paragraph of any portion or structural component of a single- or multiple-family dwelling that is eligible for the homeowner’s exemption if the construction, installation, or modifcation is for the pur-pose of making the dwelling more accessible to a severely disabled per-son. (4) The construction, installation, removal, or modifcation on or after the effective date of this paragraph of any portion or structural component of an existing building or structure if the construction, installation, remov-al, or modifcation is for the purpose of making the building more acces-sible to, or more usable by, a disabled person. (5) The construction or addition, completed on or after January 1, 2019, of a rain water capture system, as defined by the Legislature. [“Change in Ownership”] (d) For purposes of this section, the term “change in ownership” does not include the acquisition of real property as a replacement for compa-rable property if the person acquiring the real property has been displaced from the property replaced by eminent domain proceedings, by acquisition by a public entity, or governmental action that has resulted in a judgment of inverse condemnation. The real property acquired shall be deemed com-parable to the property replaced if it is similar in size, utility, and function, or if it conforms to state regulations defined by the Legislature governing the relocation of persons displaced by governmental actions. This subdivi-sion applies to any property acquired after March 1, 1975, but affects only those assessments of that property that occur after the provisions of this subdivision take effect. [Disasters—Replacement Property] (e) (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Legis-lature shall provide that the base year value of property that is substan-tially damaged or destroyed by a disaster, as declared by the Governor, may be transferred to comparable property within the same county that is acquired or newly constructed as a replacement for the substantially dam-aged or destroyed property. (2) Except as provided in paragraph (3), this subdivision applies to any comparable replacement property acquired or newly constructed on or af-ter July 1, 1985, and to the determination of base year values for the 1985– 86 fiscal year and fiscal years thereafter. (3) In addition to the transfer of base year value of property within the same county that is permitted by paragraph (1), the Legislature may autho-rize each county board of supervisors to adopt, after consultation with af-fected local agencies within the county, an ordinance allowing the transfer of the base year value of property that is located within another county in the State and is substantially damaged or destroyed by a disaster, as de-clared by the Governor, to comparable replacement property of equal or lesser value that is located within the adopting county and is acquired or newly constructed within three years of the substantial damage or destruc-tion of the original property as a replacement for that property. The scope and amount of the benefit provided to a property owner by the transfer of base year value of property pursuant to this paragraph shall not exceed the scope and amount of the benefit provided to a property owner by the trans-fer of base year value of property pursuant to subdivision (a). For purpos-es of this paragraph, “affected local agency” means any city, special dis-trict, school district, or community college district that receives an annual allocation of ad valorem property tax revenues. This paragraph applies to any comparable replacement property that is acquired or newly construct-ed as a replacement for property substantially damaged or destroyed by a disaster, as declared by the Governor, occurring on or after October 20, 1991, and to the determination of base year values for the 1991–92 fiscal year and fiscal years thereafter. (f) For the purposes of subdivision (e): (1) Property is substantially damaged or destroyed if it sustains physical damage amounting to more than 50 percent of its value immediately be-fore the disaster. Damage includes a diminution in the value of property as a result of restricted access caused by the disaster. (2) Replacement property is comparable to the property substantially damaged or destroyed if it is similar in size, utility, and function to the property that it replaces, and if the fair market value of the acquired prop-erty is comparable to the fair market value of the replaced property prior to the disaster. [Real Property Transfers between Spouses] (g) For purposes of subdivision (a), the terms “purchased” and “change in ownership” do not include the purchase or transfer of real property be-tween spouses since March 1, 1975, including, but not limited to, all of the following: (1) Transfers to a trustee for the benefcial use of a spouse, or the surviv-ing spouse of a deceased transferor, or by a trustee of such a trust to the spouse of the trustor. (2) Transfers to a spouse that take effect upon the death of a spouse. (3) Transfers to a spouse or former spouse in connection with a prop-erty settlement agreement or decree of dissolution of a marriage or legal separation. (4) The creation, transfer, or termination, solely between spouses, of any coowner’s interest. (5) The distribution of a legal entity’s property to a spouse or former spouse in exchange for the interest of the spouse in the legal entity in con-nection with a property settlement agreement or a decree of dissolution of a marriage or legal separation. [Real Property Transfers between Family Members] (h) (1) For purposes of subdivision (a), the terms “purchased” and “change in ownership” do not include the purchase or transfer of the prin-cipal residence of the transferor in the case of a purchase or transfer be-tween parents and their children, as defined by the Legislature, and the purchase or transfer of the first one million dollars ($1,000,000) of the full cash value of all other real property between parents and their children, as defined by the Legislature. This subdivision applies to both voluntary transfers and transfers resulting from a court order or judicial decree. (2) (A) Subject to subparagraph (B), commencing with purchases or transfers that occur on or after the date upon which the measure adding this paragraph becomes effective, the exclusion established by paragraph (1) also applies to a purchase or transfer of real property between grand-parents and their grandchild or grandchildren, as defined by the Legisla-ture, that otherwise qualifes under paragraph (1), if all of the parents of that grandchild or those grandchildren, who qualify as the children of the grandparents, are deceased as of the date of the purchase or transfer. (B) A purchase or transfer of a principal residence shall not be excluded pursuant to subparagraph (A) if the transferee grandchild or grandchildren also received a principal residence, or interest therein, through another purchase or transfer that was excludable pursuant to paragraph (1). The full cash value of any real property, other than a principal residence, that was transferred to the grandchild or grandchildren pursuant to a purchase or transfer that was excludable pursuant to paragraph (1), and the full cash value of a principal residence that fails to qualify for exclusion as a result of the preceding sentence, shall be included in applying, for purposes of subparagraph (A), the one-million-dollar ($1,000,000) full cash value lim-it specified in paragraph (1). [Contaminated Property] (i) (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Legisla-ture shall provide with respect to a qualified contaminated property, as de-fned in paragraph (2), that either, but not both, of the following apply: (A) (i) Subject to the limitation of clause (ii), the base year value of the qualified contaminated property, as adjusted as authorized by subdivision (b), may be transferred to a replacement property that is acquired or newly constructed as a replacement for the qualified contaminated property, if the replacement real property has a fair market value that is equal to or less than the fair market value of the qualified contaminated property if that property were not contaminated and, except as otherwise provided by this clause, is located within the same county. The base year value of the qual-ifed contaminated property may be transferred to a replacement real prop-erty located within another county if the board of supervisors of that other county has, after consultation with the affected local agencies within that county, adopted a resolution authorizing an intercounty transfer of base year value as so described. (ii) This subparagraph applies only to replacement property that is ac-quired or newly constructed within fve years after ownership in the qual-ifed contaminated property is sold or otherwise transferred. (B) In the case in which the remediation of the environmental problems on the qualified contaminated property requires the destruction of, or results in substantial damage to, a structure located on that property, the term “new construction” does not include the repair of a substantially damaged structure, or the construction of a structure replacing a destroyed structure on the qualified contaminated property, performed after the remediation of the environmental problems on that property, provided that the repaired or replacement structure is similar in size, utility, and function to the original structure. (2) For purposes of this subdivision, “qualified contaminated property” means residential or nonresidential real property that is all of the following: (A) In the case of residential real property, rendered uninhabitable, and in the case of nonresidential real property, rendered unusable, as the result of either environmental problems, in the nature of and including, but not limited to, the presence of toxic or hazardous materials, or the remediation of those environmental problems, except where the existence of the environmental problems was known to the owner, or to a related individual or entity as described in paragraph (3), at the time the real property was acquired or constructed. For purposes of this subparagraph, residential real property is “uninhabitable” if that property, as a result of health hazards caused by or associated with the environmental problems, is unfit for human habitation, and nonresidential real property is “unusable” if that property, as a result of health hazards caused by or associated with the environ-mental problems, is unhealthy and unsuitable for occupancy. (B) Located on a site that has been designated as a toxic or environmental hazard or as an environmental cleanup site by an agency of the State of California or the federal government. (C) Real property that contains a structure or structures thereon prior to the completion of environmental cleanup activities, and that structure or structures are substantially damaged or destroyed as a result of those envi-ronmental cleanup activities. (D) Stipulated by the lead governmental agency, with respect to the en-vironmental problems or environmental cleanup of the real property, not to have been rendered uninhabitable or unusable, as applicable, as de-scribed in subparagraph (A), by any act or omission in which an owner of that real property participated or acquiesced. (3) It shall be rebuttably presumed that an owner of the real property participated or acquiesced in any act or omission that rendered the real property uninhabitable or unusable, as applicable, if that owner is related to any individual or entity that committed that act or omission in any of the following ways: (A) Is a spouse, parent, child, grandparent, grandchild, or sibling of that individual. (B) Is a corporate parent, subsidiary, or affliate of that entity. (C) Is an owner of, or has control of, that entity. (D) Is owned or controlled by that entity. If this presumption is not overcome, the owner shall not receive the relief provided for in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1). The presumption may be overcome by presentation of satisfactory evidence to the assessor, who shall not be bound by the findings of the lead governmental agency in determining whether the presumption has been overcome. (4) This subdivision applies only to replacement property that is ac-quired or constructed on or after January 1, 1995, and to property repairs performed on or after that date. [Effectiveness of Amendments] (j) Unless specifcally provided otherwise, amendments to this section adopted prior to November 1, 1988, are effective for changes in ownership that occur, and new construction that is completed, after the effective date of the amendment. Unless specifcally provided otherwise, amendments to this section adopted after November 1, 1988, are effective for changes in ownership that occur, and new construction that is completed, on or after the effective date of the amendment. [As amended June 5, 2018.] [Changes in State Taxes—Vote Requirement—Defnition of “Tax”] SEC. 3. (a) Any change in state statute which results in any taxpayer paying a higher tax must be imposed by an act passed by not less than two-thirds of all members elected to each of the two houses of the Legislature, except that no new ad valorem taxes on real property, or sales or transac-tion taxes on the sales of real property may be imposed. (b) As used in this section, “tax” means any levy, charge, or exaction of any kind imposed by the State, except the following: (1) A charge imposed for a specifc benefit conferred or privilege grant-ed directly to the payor that is not provided to those not charged, and which does not exceed the reasonable costs to the State of conferring the benefit or granting the privilege to the payor. (2) A charge imposed for a specifc government service or product pro-vided directly to the payor that is not provided to those not charged, and which does not exceed the reasonable costs to the State of providing the service or product to the payor. (3) A charge imposed for the reasonable regulatory costs to the State incident to issuing licenses and permits, performing investigations, inspec-tions, and audits, enforcing agricultural marketing orders, and the admin-istrative enforcement and adjudication thereof. (4) A charge imposed for entrance to or use of state property, or the pur-chase, rental, or lease of state property, except charges governed by Sec-tion 15 of Article XI. (5) A fne, penalty, or other monetary charge imposed by the judicial branch of government or the State, as a result of a violation of law. (c) Any tax adopted after January 1, 2010, but prior to the effective date of this act, that was not adopted in compliance with the requirements of this section is void 12 months after the effective date of this act unless the tax is reenacted by the Legislature and signed into law by the Governor in compliance with the requirements of this section. (d) The State bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that a levy, charge, or other exaction is not a tax, that the amount is no more than necessary to cover the reasonable costs of the governmen-tal activity, and that the manner in which those costs are allocated to a payor bear a fair or reasonable relationship to the payor’s burdens on, or benefits received from, the governmental activity. [As amended November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Imposition of Special Taxes] SEC. 4. Cities, Counties and special districts, by a two-thirds vote of the qualified electors of such district, may impose special taxes on such district, except ad valorem taxes on real property or a transaction tax or sales tax on the sale of real property within such City, County or special district. [New section adopted June 6, 1978. Initiative measure.] [Effective Date of Article] SEC. 5. This article shall take effect for the tax year beginning on July 1 following the passage of this Amendment, except Section 3 which shall become effective upon the passage of this article. [New section adopted June 6, 1978. Initiative measure.] [Severability] SEC. 6. If any section, part, clause, or phrase hereof is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining sections shall not be affected but will remain in full force and effect. [New section adopted June 6, 1978. Initiative measure.] [California Children and Families First Act of 1998] SEC. 7. Section 3 of this article does not apply to the California Chil-dren and Families First Act of 1998. [New section adopted November 3, 1998. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE XIII B * GOVERNMENT SPENDING LIMITATION [Total Annual Appropriations] SECTION 1. The total annual appropriations subject to limitation of the State and of each local government shall not exceed the appropriations limit of the entity of government for the prior year adjusted for the change in the cost of living and the change in population, except as otherwise pro-vided in this article. [As amended June 5, 1990. Operative July 1, 1990.] [Appropriations Limit Annual Calculation—Review] SEC. 1.5. The annual calculation of the appropriations limit under this article for each entity of local government shall be reviewed as part of an annual fnancial audit. [New section adopted June 5, 1990. Operative July 1, 1990.] [Revenues in Excess of Limitation] SEC. 2. (a) (1) Fifty percent of all revenues received by the State in a fiscal year and in the fiscal year immediately following it in excess of the amount which may be appropriated by the State in compliance with this article during that fiscal year and the fiscal year immediately following it shall be transferred and allocated, from a fund established for that purpose, pursuant to Section 8.5 of Article XVI. (2) Fifty percent of all revenues received by the State in a fiscal year and in the fiscal year immediately following it in excess of the amount which may be appropriated by the State in compliance with this article during that fiscal year and the fiscal year immediately following it shall be re-turned by a revision of tax rates or fee schedules within the next two sub-sequent fiscal years. (b) All revenues received by an entity of government, other than the State, in a fiscal year and in the fiscal year immediately following it in ex-cess of the amount which may be appropriated by the entity in compliance with this article during that fiscal year and the fiscal year immediately fol-lowing it shall be returned by a revision of tax rates or fee schedules with-in the next two subsequent fiscal years. [As amended June 5, 1990. Opera-tive July 1, 1990.] [Appropriations Limit—Adjustments] SEC. 3. The appropriations limit for any fiscal year pursuant to Sec. 1 shall be adjusted as follows: (a) In the event that the fnancial responsibility of providing services is transferred, in whole or in part, whether by annexation, incorporation or * New Article XIII B adopted November 6, 1979. Operative commencing first day of fiscal year following adoption. Initiative measure. otherwise, from one entity of government to another, then for the year in which such transfer becomes effective the appropriations limit of the trans-feree entity shall be increased by such reasonable amount as the said enti-ties shall mutually agree and the appropriations limit of the transferor en-tity shall be decreased by the same amount. (b) In the event that the fnancial responsibility of providing services is transferred, in whole or in part, from an entity of government to a private entity, or the fnancial source for the provision of services is transferred, in whole or in part, from other revenues of an entity of government, to regu-latory licenses, user charges or user fees, then for the year of such transfer the appropriations limit of such entity of government shall be decreased accordingly. (c) (1) In the event an emergency is declared by the legislative body of an entity of government, the appropriations limit of the affected entity of government may be exceeded provided that the appropriations limits in the following three years are reduced accordingly to prevent an aggregate in-crease in appropriations resulting from the emergency. (2) In the event an emergency is declared by the Governor, appropria-tions approved by a two-thirds vote of the legislative body of an affected entity of government to an emergency account for expenditures relating to that emergency shall not constitute appropriations subject to limitation. As used in this paragraph, “emergency” means the existence, as declared by the Governor, of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the State, or parts thereof, caused by such conditions as attack or probable or imminent attack by an enemy of the United States, fre, food, drought, storm, civil disorder, earthquake, or vol-canic eruption. [As amended June 5, 1990. Operative July 1, 1990.] [Appropriations Limit—Establishment or Change] SEC. 4. The appropriations limit imposed on any new or existing en-tity of government by this Article may be established or changed by the electors of such entity, subject to and in conformity with constitutional and statutory voting requirements. The duration of any such change shall be as determined by said electors, but shall in no event exceed four years from the most recent vote of said electors creating or continuing such change. [New section adopted November 6, 1979. Operative commencing first day of fiscal year following adoption. Initiative measure.] [Contingency, Emergency, Unemployment, Etc., Funds—Contributions— Withdrawals—Transfers] SEC. 5. Each entity of government may establish such contingency, emergency, unemployment, reserve, retirement, sinking fund, trust, or similar funds as it shall deem reasonable and proper. Contributions to any such fund, to the extent that such contributions are derived from the pro-ceeds of taxes, shall for purposes of this Article constitute appropriations subject to limitation in the year of contribution. Neither withdrawals from any such fund, nor expenditures of (or authorizations to expend) such withdrawals, nor transfers between or among such funds, shall for pur-poses of this Article constitute appropriations subject to limitation. [New section adopted November 6, 1979. Operative commencing first day of fs-cal year following adoption. Initiative measure.] [Prudent State Reserve] SEC. 5.5. Prudent State Reserve. The Legislature shall establish a prudent state reserve fund in such amount as it shall deem reasonable and necessary. Contributions to, and withdrawals from, the fund shall be sub-ject to the provisions of Section 5 of this Article. [New section adopted November 8, 1988. Initiative measure.] [Mandates of New Programs or Higher Levels of Service] SEC. 6. (a) Whenever the Legislature or any state agency mandates a new program or higher level of service on any local government, the State shall provide a subvention of funds to reimburse that local government for the costs of the program or increased level of service, except that the Leg-islature may, but need not, provide a subvention of funds for the following mandates: (1) Legislative mandates requested by the local agency affected. (2) Legislation defning a new crime or changing an existing defnition of a crime. (3) Legislative mandates enacted prior to January 1, 1975, or executive orders or regulations initially implementing legislation enacted prior to January 1, 1975. (4) Legislative mandates contained in statutes within the scope of para-graph (7) of subdivision (b) of Section 3 of Article 1. (b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), for the 2005–06 fiscal year and every subsequent fiscal year, for a mandate for which the costs of a local government claimant have been determined in a preceding fiscal year to be payable by the State pursuant to law, the Legislature shall either ap-propriate, in the annual Budget Act, the full payable amount that has not been previously paid, or suspend the operation of the mandate for the fiscal year for which the annual Budget Act is applicable in a manner prescribed by law. (2) Payable claims for costs incurred prior to the 2004–05 fiscal year that have not been paid prior to the 2005–06 fiscal year may be paid over a term of years, as prescribed by law. (3) Ad valorem property tax revenues shall not be used to reimburse a local government for the costs of a new program or higher level of service. (4) This subdivision applies to a mandate only as it affects a city, coun-ty, city and county, or special district. (5) This subdivision shall not apply to a requirement to provide or rec-ognize any procedural or substantive protection, right, benefit, or employ-ment status of any local government employee or retiree, or of any local government employee organization, that arises from, affects, or directly relates to future, current, or past local government employment and that constitutes a mandate subject to this section. (c) A mandated new program or higher level of service includes a trans-fer by the Legislature from the State to cities, counties, cities and counties, or special districts of complete or partial fnancial responsibility for a re-quired program for which the State previously had complete or partial f-nancial responsibility. [As amended June 3, 2014.] [Bonded Indebtedness] SEC. 7. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to impair the ability of the State or of any local government to meet its obligations with respect to existing or future bonded indebtedness. [New section adopted Novem-ber 6, 1979. Operative commencing first day of fiscal year following adop-tion. Initiative measure.] [definitions] SEC. 8. As used in this article and except as otherwise expressly pro-vided herein: (a) “Appropriations subject to limitation” of the State means any autho-rization to expend during a fiscal year the proceeds of taxes levied by or for the State, exclusive of state subventions for the use and operation of local government (other than subventions made pursuant to Section 6) and further exclusive of refunds of taxes, benefit payments from retirement, unemployment insurance, and disability insurance funds. (b) “Appropriations subject to limitation” of an entity of local govern-ment means any authorization to expend during a fiscal year the proceeds of taxes levied by or for that entity and the proceeds of state subventions to that entity (other than subventions made pursuant to Section 6) exclu-sive of refunds of taxes. (c) “Proceeds of taxes” shall include, but not be restricted to, all tax rev-enues and the proceeds to an entity of government, from (1) regulatory licenses, user charges, and user fees to the extent that those proceeds ex-ceed the costs reasonably borne by that entity in providing the regulation, product, or service, and (2) the investment of tax revenues. With respect to any local government, “proceeds of taxes” shall include subventions re-ceived from the State, other than pursuant to Section 6, and, with respect to the State, proceeds of taxes shall exclude such subventions. (d) “Local government” means any city, county, city and county, school district, special district, authority, or other political subdivision of or with-in the State. (e) (1) “Change in the cost of living” for the State, a school district, or a community college district means the percentage change in California per capita personal income from the preceding year. (2) “Change in the cost of living” for an entity of local government, other than a school district or a community college district, shall be either (A)the percentage change in California per capita personal income from the preceding year, or (B) the percentage change in the local assessment roll from the preceding year for the jurisdiction due to the addition of local nonresidential new construction. Each entity of local government shall se-lect its change in the cost of living pursuant to this paragraph annually by a recorded vote of the entity’s governing body. (f) “Change in population” of any entity of government, other than the State, a school district, or a community college district, shall be deter-mined by a method prescribed by the Legislature. “Change in population” of a school district or a community college dis-trict shall be the percentage change in the average daily attendance of the school district or community college district from the preceding fiscal year, as determined by a method prescribed by the Legislature. “Change in population” of the State shall be determined by adding (1) the percentage change in the State’s population multiplied by the percent-age of the State’s budget in the prior fiscal year that is expended for other than educational purposes for kindergarten and grades one to 12, inclusive, and the community colleges, and (2) the percentage change in the total statewide average daily attendance in kindergarten and grades one to 12, inclusive, and the community colleges, multiplied by the percentage of the State’s budget in the prior fiscal year that is expended for educational pur-poses for kindergarten and grades one to 12, inclusive, and the community colleges. Any determination of population pursuant to this subdivision, other than that measured by average daily attendance, shall be revised, as necessary, to refect the periodic census conducted by the United States Department of Commerce, or successor department. (g) “Debt service” means appropriations required to pay the cost of in-terest and redemption charges, including the funding of any reserve or sinking fund required in connection therewith, on indebtedness existing or legally authorized as of January 1, 1979, or on bonded indebtedness there-after approved according to law by a vote of the electors of the issuing en-tity voting in an election for that purpose. (h) The “appropriations limit” of each entity of government for each fs-cal year is that amount which total annual appropriations subject to limita-tion may not exceed under Sections 1 and 3. However, the “appropriations limit” of each entity of government for fiscal year 1978–79 is the total of the appropriations subject to limitation of the entity for that fiscal year. For fiscal year 1978–79, state subventions to local governments, exclusive of federal grants, are deemed to have been derived from the proceeds of state taxes. (i) Except as otherwise provided in Section 5, “appropriations subject to limitation” do not include local agency loan funds or indebtedness funds, investment (or authorizations to invest) funds of the State, or of an entity of local government in accounts at banks or savings and loan associations or in liquid securities. [As amended June 5, 1990. Operative July 1, 1990.] [Exceptions to Appropriations Subject to Limitation] SEC. 9. “Appropriations subject to limitation” for each entity of gov-ernment do not include: (a) Appropriations for debt service. (b) Appropriations required to comply with mandates of the courts or the federal government which, without discretion, require an expenditure for additional services or which unavoidably make the provision of exist-ing services more costly. (c) Appropriations of any special district which existed on January 1, 1978, and which did not as of the 1977–78 fiscal year levy an ad valorem tax on property in excess of 12 cents per $100 of assessed value; or the appropriations of any special district then existing or thereafter created by a vote of the people, which is totally funded by other than the proceeds of taxes. (d) Appropriations for all qualified capital outlay projects, as defined by the Legislature. (e) Appropriations of revenue which are derived from any of the follow-ing: (1) That portion of the taxes imposed on motor vehicle fuels for use in motor vehicles upon public streets and highways at a rate of more than nine cents ($0.09) per gallon. (2) Sales and use taxes collected on that increment of the tax specified in paragraph (1). (3) That portion of the weight fee imposed on commercial vehicles which exceeds the weight fee imposed on those vehicles on January 1, 1990. [As amended June 5, 1990. Operative July 1, 1990.] [Effective Date of Article] SEC. 10. This Article shall be effective commencing with the first day of the fiscal year following its adoption. [New section adopted November 6, 1979. Operative commencing first day of fiscal year following adoption. Initiative measure.] [Appropriations Limit on or after July 1, 1990] SEC. 10.5. For fiscal years beginning on or after July 1, 1990, the ap-propriations limit of each entity of government shall be the appropriations limit for the 1986–87 fiscal year adjusted for the changes made from that fiscal year pursuant to this article, as amended by the measure adding this section, adjusted for the changes required by Section 3. [New section ad-opted June 5, 1990. Operative July 1, 1990.] [Category Added or Removed from Appropriations Subject to Limitation—Severability] SEC. 11. If any appropriation category shall be added to or removed from appropriations subject to limitation, pursuant to fnal judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction and any appeal therefrom, the appro-priations limit shall be adjusted accordingly. If any section, part, clause or phrase in this Article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining portions of this Article shall not be affected but shall remain in full force and effect. [New section adopted November 6, 1979. Operative commencing first day of fiscal year following adoption. Initiative mea-sure.] [Exceptions to Appropriations Subject to Limitation] SEC. 12. “Appropriations subject to limitation” of each entity of gov-ernment shall not include appropriations of revenue from the Cigarette and Tobacco Products Surtax Fund created by the Tobacco Tax and Health Protection Act of 1988. No adjustment in the appropriations limit of any entity of government shall be required pursuant to Section 3 as a result of revenue being deposited in or appropriated from the Cigarette and Tobac-co Products Surtax Fund created by the Tobacco Tax and Health Protection Act of 1988. [New section adopted November 8, 1988. Initiative measure.] [Exceptions to Appropriations Subject to Limitation] SEC. 13. “Appropriations subject to limitation” of each entity of gov-ernment shall not include appropriations of revenue from the California Children and Families First Trust Fund created by the California Children and Families First Act of 1998. No adjustment in the appropriations limit of any entity of government shall be required pursuant to Section 3 as a result of revenue being deposited in or appropriated from the California Children and Families First Trust Fund. The surtax created by the Califor-nia Children and Families First Act of 1998 shall not be considered Gen-eral Fund revenues for the purposes of Section 8 of Article XVI. [New sec-tion adopted November 3, 1998. Initiative measure.] [Exceptions to Appropriations Subject to Limitation] SEC. 14. “Appropriations subject to limitation” of each entity of gov-ernment shall not include appropriations of revenue from the California Healthcare, Research and Prevention Tobacco Tax Act of 2016 Fund cre-ated by the California Healthcare, Research and Prevention Tobacco Tax Act of 2016. No adjustment in the appropriations limit of any entity of government shall be required pursuant to Section 3 as a result of revenue being deposited in or appropriated from the California Healthcare, Re-search and Prevention Tobacco Tax Act of 2016 Fund. [New Section ad-opted November 8, 2016. Initiative measure.] [Exceptions to Appropriations Subject to Limitation] SEC. 15. “Appropriations subject to limitation” of each entity of gov-ernment shall not include appropriations of revenues from the Road Main-tenance and Rehabilitation Account created by the Road Repair and Ac-countability Act of 2017, or any other revenues deposited into any other funds pursuant to the act. No adjustment in the appropriations limit of any entity of government shall be required pursuant to Section 3 as a result of revenues being deposited in or appropriated from the Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation Account created by the Road Repair and Accountabil-ity Act of 2017 or any other account pursuant to the act. [New section ad-opted June 5, 2018.] ARTICLE XIII C * VOTER APPROVAL FOR LOCAL TAX LEVIES SECTION 1. definitions. As used in this article: (a) “General tax” means any tax imposed for general governmental pur-poses. (b) “Local government” means any county, city, city and county, includ-ing a charter city or county, any special district, or any other local or re-gional governmental entity. (c) “Special district” means an agency of the State, formed pursuant to general law or a special act, for the local performance of governmental or proprietary functions with limited geographic boundaries including, but not limited to, school districts and redevelopment agencies. (d) “Special tax” means any tax imposed for specifc purposes, includ-ing a tax imposed for specifc purposes, which is placed into a general fund. (e) As used in this article, “tax” means any levy, charge, or exaction of any kind imposed by a local government, except the following: (1) A charge imposed for a specifc benefit conferred or privilege grant-ed directly to the payor that is not provided to those not charged, and which does not exceed the reasonable costs to the local government of conferring the benefit or granting the privilege. (2) A charge imposed for a specifc government service or product pro-vided directly to the payor that is not provided to those not charged, and * New Article XIII C adopted November 5, 1996. Initiative measure. which does not exceed the reasonable costs to the local government of pro-viding the service or product. (3) A charge imposed for the reasonable regulatory costs to a local gov-ernment for issuing licenses and permits, performing investigations, in-spections, and audits, enforcing agricultural marketing orders, and the ad-ministrative enforcement and adjudication thereof. (4) A charge imposed for entrance to or use of local government prop-erty, or the purchase, rental, or lease of local government property. (5) A fne, penalty, or other monetary charge imposed by the judicial branch of government or a local government, as a result of a violation of law. (6) A charge imposed as a condition of property development. (7) Assessments and property-related fees imposed in accordance with the provisions of Article XIII D. The local government bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that a levy, charge, or other exaction is not a tax, that the amount is no more than necessary to cover the reasonable costs of the gov-ernmental activity, and that the manner in which those costs are allocated to a payor bear a fair or reasonable relationship to the payor’s burdens on, or benefits received from, the governmental activity. [As amended Novem-ber 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] SEC. 2. Local Government Tax Limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution: (a) All taxes imposed by any local government shall be deemed to be either general taxes or special taxes. Special purpose districts or agencies, including school districts, shall have no power to levy general taxes. (b) No local government may impose, extend, or increase any general tax unless and until that tax is submitted to the electorate and approved by a majority vote. A general tax shall not be deemed to have been increased if it is imposed at a rate not higher than the maximum rate so approved. The election required by this subdivision shall be consolidated with a reg-ularly scheduled general election for members of the governing body of the local government, except in cases of emergency declared by a unani-mous vote of the governing body. (c) Any general tax imposed, extended, or increased, without voter ap-proval, by any local government on or after January 1, 1995, and prior to the effective date of this article, shall continue to be imposed only if ap-proved by a majority vote of the voters voting in an election on the issue of the imposition, which election shall be held within two years of the ef-fective date of this article and in compliance with subdivision (b). (d) No local government may impose, extend, or increase any special tax unless and until that tax is submitted to the electorate and approved by a two-thirds vote. A special tax shall not be deemed to have been increased if it is imposed at a rate not higher than the maximum rate so approved. [New section adopted November 5, 1996. Initiative measure.] SEC. 3. Initiative Power for Local Taxes, Assessments, Fees and Charges. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, in-cluding, but not limited to, Sections 8 and 9 of Article II, the initiative power shall not be prohibited or otherwise limited in matters of reducing or repealing any local tax, assessment, fee or charge. The power of initia-tive to affect local taxes, assessments, fees and charges shall be applicable to all local governments and neither the Legislature nor any local govern-ment charter shall impose a signature requirement higher than that appli-cable to statewide statutory initiatives. [New section adopted November 5, 1996. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE XIII D * ASSESSMENT AND PROPERTY-RELATED FEE REFORM SECTION 1. Application. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the provisions of this article shall apply to all assessments, fees and charg-es, whether imposed pursuant to state statute or local government charter authority. Nothing in this article or Article XIII C shall be construed to: (a) Provide any new authority to any agency to impose a tax, assess-ment, fee, or charge. (b) Affect existing laws relating to the imposition of fees or charges as a condition of property development. (c) Affect existing laws relating to the imposition of timber yield taxes. [New section adopted November 5, 1996. Initiative measure.] SEC. 2. definitions. As used in this article: (a) “Agency” means any local government as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 1 of Article XIII C. (b) “Assessment” means any levy or charge upon real property by an agency for a special benefit conferred upon the real property. “Assess-ment” includes, but is not limited to, “special assessment,” “benefit assess-ment,” “maintenance assessment” and “special assessment tax.” (c) “Capital cost” means the cost of acquisition, installation, construc-tion, reconstruction, or replacement of a permanent public improvement by an agency. (d) “District” means an area determined by an agency to contain all par-cels which will receive a special benefit from a proposed public improve-ment or property-related service. (e) “Fee” or “charge” means any levy other than an ad valorem tax, a special tax, or an assessment, imposed by an agency upon a parcel or upon * New Article XIII D adopted November 5, 1996. Initiative measure. a person as an incident of property ownership, including a user fee or charge for a property-related service. (f) “Maintenance and operation expenses” means the cost of rent, re-pair, replacement, rehabilitation, fuel, power, electrical current, care, and supervision necessary to properly operate and maintain a permanent pub-lic improvement. (g) “Property ownership” shall be deemed to include tenancies of real property where tenants are directly liable to pay the assessment, fee, or charge in question. (h) “Property-related service” means a public service having a direct re-lationship to property ownership. (i) “Special benefit” means a particular and distinct benefit over and above general benefits conferred on real property located in the district or to the public at large. General enhancement of property value does not constitute “special benefit.” [New section adopted November 5, 1996. Ini-tiative measure.] SEC. 3. Property Taxes, Assessments, Fees and Charges Limit-ed. (a) No tax, assessment, fee, or charge shall be assessed by any agen-cy upon any parcel of property or upon any person as an incident of prop-erty ownership except: (1) The ad valorem property tax imposed pursuant to Article XIII and Article XIII A. (2) Any special tax receiving a two-thirds vote pursuant to Section 4 of Article XIII A. (3) Assessments as provided by this article. (4) Fees or charges for property-related services as provided by this ar-ticle. (b) For purposes of this article, fees for the provision of electrical or gas service shall not be deemed charges or fees imposed as an incident of property ownership. [New section adopted November 5, 1996. Initiative measure.] SEC. 4. Procedures and Requirements for All Assessments. (a) An agency which proposes to levy an assessment shall identify all parcels which will have a special benefit conferred upon them and upon which an assessment will be imposed. The proportionate special benefit derived by each identifed parcel shall be determined in relationship to the entirety of the capital cost of a public improvement, the maintenance and operation expenses of a public improvement, or the cost of the property-related ser-vice being provided. No assessment shall be imposed on any parcel which exceeds the reasonable cost of the proportional special benefit conferred on that parcel. Only special benefits are assessable, and an agency shall separate the general benefits from the special benefits conferred on a par-cel. Parcels within a district that are owned or used by any agency, the State of California or the United States shall not be exempt from assess-ment unless the agency can demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that those publicly owned parcels in fact receive no special benefit. (b) All assessments shall be supported by a detailed engineer’s report prepared by a registered professional engineer certified by the State of California. (c) The amount of the proposed assessment for each identifed parcel shall be calculated and the record owner of each parcel shall be given writ-ten notice by mail of the proposed assessment, the total amount thereof chargeable to the entire district, the amount chargeable to the owner’s par-ticular parcel, the duration of the payments, the reason for the assessment and the basis upon which the amount of the proposed assessment was cal-culated, together with the date, time, and location of a public hearing on the proposed assessment. Each notice shall also include, in a conspicuous place thereon, a summary of the procedures applicable to the completion, return, and tabulation of the ballots required pursuant to subdivision (d), including a disclosure statement that the existence of a majority protest, as defined in subdivision (e), will result in the assessment not being imposed. (d) Each notice mailed to owners of identifed parcels within the district pursuant to subdivision (c) shall contain a ballot which includes the agen-cy’s address for receipt of the ballot once completed by any owner receiv-ing the notice whereby the owner may indicate his or her name, reasonable identifcation of the parcel, and his or her support or opposition to the pro-posed assessment. (e) The agency shall conduct a public hearing upon the proposed assess-ment not less than 45 days after mailing the notice of the proposed assess-ment to record owners of each identifed parcel. At the public hearing, the agency shall consider all protests against the proposed assessment and tabulate the ballots. The agency shall not impose an assessment if there is a majority protest. A majority protest exists if, upon the conclusion of the hearing, ballots submitted in opposition to the assessment exceed the bal-lots submitted in favor of the assessment. In tabulating the ballots, the bal-lots shall be weighted according to the proportional fnancial obligation of the affected property. (f) In any legal action contesting the validity of any assessment, the bur-den shall be on the agency to demonstrate that the property or properties in question receive a special benefit over and above the benefits conferred on the public at large and that the amount of any contested assessment is proportional to, and no greater than, the benefits conferred on the property or properties in question. (g) Because only special benefits are assessable, electors residing with-in the district who do not own property within the district shall not be deemed under this Constitution to have been deprived of the right to vote for any assessment. If a court determines that the Constitution of the Unit-ed States or other federal law requires otherwise, the assessment shall not be imposed unless approved by a two-thirds vote of the electorate in the district in addition to being approved by the property owners as required by subdivision (e). [New section adopted November 5, 1996. Initiative measure.] SEC. 5. Effective Date. Pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 10 of Article II, the provisions of this article shall become effective the day after the election unless otherwise provided. Beginning July 1, 1997, all exist-ing, new, or increased assessments shall comply with this article. Notwith-standing the foregoing, the following assessments existing on the effective date of this article shall be exempt from the procedures and approval pro-cess set forth in Section 4: (a) Any assessment imposed exclusively to fnance the capital costs or maintenance and operation expenses for sidewalks, streets, sewers, water, food control, drainage systems or vector control. Subsequent increases in such assessments shall be subject to the procedures and approval process set forth in Section 4. (b) Any assessment imposed pursuant to a petition signed by the per-sons owning all of the parcels subject to the assessment at the time the as-sessment is initially imposed. Subsequent increases in such assessments shall be subject to the procedures and approval process set forth in Section 4. (c) Any assessment the proceeds of which are exclusively used to repay bonded indebtedness of which the failure to pay would violate the Con-tract Impairment Clause of the Constitution of the United States. (d) Any assessment which previously received majority voter approval from the voters voting in an election on the issue of the assessment. Sub-sequent increases in those assessments shall be subject to the procedures and approval process set forth in Section 4. [New section adopted Novem-ber 5, 1996. Initiative measure.] SEC. 6. Property-Related Fees and Charges. (a) Procedures for New or Increased Fees and Charges. An agency shall follow the procedures pursuant to this section in imposing or increasing any fee or charge as de-fned pursuant to this article, including, but not limited to, the following: (1) The parcels upon which a fee or charge is proposed for imposition shall be identifed. The amount of the fee or charge proposed to be im-posed upon each parcel shall be calculated. The agency shall provide writ-ten notice by mail of the proposed fee or charge to the record owner of each identifed parcel upon which the fee or charge is proposed for impo-sition, the amount of the fee or charge proposed to be imposed upon each, the basis upon which the amount of the proposed fee or charge was calcu-lated, the reason for the fee or charge, together with the date, time, and location of a public hearing on the proposed fee or charge. (2) The agency shall conduct a public hearing upon the proposed fee or charge not less than 45 days after mailing the notice of the proposed fee or charge to the record owners of each identifed parcel upon which the fee or charge is proposed for imposition. At the public hearing, the agency shall consider all protests against the proposed fee or charge. If written protests against the proposed fee or charge are presented by a majority of owners of the identifed parcels, the agency shall not impose the fee or charge. (b) Requirements for Existing, New or Increased Fees and Charges. A fee or charge shall not be extended, imposed, or increased by any agency unless it meets all of the following requirements: (1) Revenues derived from the fee or charge shall not exceed the funds required to provide the property-related service. (2) Revenues derived from the fee or charge shall not be used for any purpose other than that for which the fee or charge was imposed. (3) The amount of a fee or charge imposed upon any parcel or person as an incident of property ownership shall not exceed the proportional cost of the service attributable to the parcel. (4) No fee or charge may be imposed for a service unless that service is actually used by, or immediately available to, the owner of the property in question. Fees or charges based on potential or future use of a service are not permitted. Standby charges, whether characterized as charges or as-sessments, shall be classifed as assessments and shall not be imposed without compliance with Section 4. (5) No fee or charge may be imposed for general governmental services including, but not limited to, police, fre, ambulance or library services, where the service is available to the public at large in substantially the same manner as it is to property owners. Reliance by an agency on any parcel map, including, but not limited to, an assessor’s parcel map, may be considered a signifcant factor in deter-mining whether a fee or charge is imposed as an incident of property own-ership for purposes of this article. In any legal action contesting the valid-ity of a fee or charge, the burden shall be on the agency to demonstrate compliance with this article. (c) Voter Approval for New or Increased Fees and Charges. Except for fees or charges for sewer, water, and refuse collection services, no proper-ty-related fee or charge shall be imposed or increased unless and until that fee or charge is submitted and approved by a majority vote of the property owners of the property subject to the fee or charge or, at the option of the agency, by a two-thirds vote of the electorate residing in the affected area. The election shall be conducted not less than 45 days after the public hear-ing. An agency may adopt procedures similar to those for increases in as-sessments in the conduct of elections under this subdivision. (d) Beginning July 1, 1997, all fees or charges shall comply with this section. [New section adopted November 5, 1996. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE XIV. [Repealed June 8, 1976. See Article XIV, below.] ARTICLE XIV * LABOR RELATIONS SECTION 1. [Repealed June 8, 1976. See Section 1, below.] [Minimum Wages and General Welfare of Employees] SECTION 1. The Legislature may provide for minimum wages and for the general welfare of employees and for those purposes may confer on a commission legislative, executive, and judicial powers. [New section ad-opted June 8, 1976.] SEC. 2. [Repealed June 8, 1976. See Section 2, below.] [Eight-hour Workday] SEC. 2. Worktime of mechanics or workers on public works may not exceed eight hours a day except in wartime or extraordinary emergencies that endanger life or property. The Legislature shall provide for enforce-ment of this section. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] SEC. 3. [Repealed June 8, 1976. See Section 3, below.] [Mechanics’ Liens] SEC. 3. Mechanics, persons furnishing materials, artisans, and labor-ers of every class, shall have a lien upon the property upon which they have bestowed labor or furnished material for the value of such labor done and material furnished; and the Legislature shall provide, by law, for the speedy and effcient enforcement of such liens. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] SEC. 4. [Repealed June 8, 1976. See Section 4, below.] [Workers’ Compensation] SEC. 4. The Legislature is hereby expressly vested with plenary power, unlimited by any provision of this Constitution, to create, and enforce a complete system of workers’ compensation, by appropriate legislation, and in that behalf to create and enforce a liability on the part of any or all persons to compensate any or all of their workers for injury or disability, and their dependents for death incurred or sustained by the said workers in the course of their employment, irrespective of the fault of any party. A complete system of workers’ compensation includes adequate provisions for the comfort, health and safety and general welfare of any and all work- * New Article XIV adopted June 8, 1976. ers and those dependent upon them for support to the extent of relieving from the consequences of any injury or death incurred or sustained by workers in the course of their employment, irrespective of the fault of any party; also full provision for securing safety in places of employment; full provision for such medical, surgical, hospital and other remedial treatment as is requisite to cure and relieve from the effects of such injury; full provision for adequate insurance coverage against liability to pay or furnish compensation; full provision for regulating such insurance coverage in all its aspects, including the establishment and management of a state compensation insurance fund; full provision for otherwise securing the payment of compensation; and full provision for vesting power, authority and jurisdiction in an administrative body with all the requisite governmental functions to determine any dispute or matter arising under such legislation, to the end that the administration of such legislation shall accomplish substantial justice in all cases expeditiously, inexpensively, and without incumbrance of any character; all of which matters are expressly declared to be the social public policy of this State, binding upon all departments of the state government. The Legislature is vested with plenary powers, to provide for the settlement of any disputes arising under such legislation by arbitration, or by an industrial accident commission, by the courts, or by either, any, or all of these agencies, either separately or in combination, and may fx and control the method and manner of trial of any such dispute, the rules of evidence and the manner of review of decisions rendered by the tribunal or tribunals designated by it; provided, that all decisions of any such tribunal shall be subject to review by the appellate courts of this State. The Legislature may combine in one statute all the provisions for a complete system of workers’ compensation, as herein defined. The Legislature shall have power to provide for the payment of an award to the State in the case of the death, arising out of and in the course of the employment, of an employee without dependents, and such awards may be used for the payment of extra compensation for subsequent injuries beyond the liability of a single employer for awards to employees of the employer. Nothing contained herein shall be taken or construed to impair or render ineffectual in any measure the creation and existence of the industrial accident commission of this State or the state compensation insurance fund, the creation and existence of which, with all the functions vested in them, are hereby ratifed and confrmed. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] SEC. 5. [Repealed November 6, 1990. See Section 5, below.] [Inmate Labor] SECTION 5. (a) The Director of Corrections or any county Sheriff or other local government official charged with jail operations, may enter into contracts with public entities, nonprofit or for profit organizations, en-tities, or businesses for the purpose of conducting programs which use in-mate labor. Such programs shall be operated and implemented pursuant to statutes enacted by or in accordance with the provisions of the Prison In-mate Labor Initiative of 1990, and by rules and regulations prescribed by the Director of Corrections and, for county jail programs, by local ordi-nances. (b) No contract shall be executed with an employer that will initiate em-ployment by inmates in the same job classifcation as non-inmate employ-ees of the same employer who are on strike, as defined in Section 1132.6 of the Labor Code, as it reads on January 1, 1990, or who are subject to lockout, as defined in Section 1132.8 of the Labor Code, as it reads on January 1, 1990. Total daily hours worked by inmates employed in the same job classifcation as non-inmate employees of the same employer who are on strike, as defined in Section 1132.6 of the Labor Code, as it reads on January 1, 1990, or who are subject to lockout, as defined in Sec-tion 1132.8 of the Labor Code, as it reads on January 1, 1990, shall not exceed, for the duration of the strike, the average daily hours worked for the preceding six months, or if the program has been in operation for less than six months, the average for the period of operation. (c) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as creating a right of in-mates to work. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative mea-sure.] ARTICLE XV. [Repealed June 8, 1976. See Article XV, below.] ARTICLE XV * USURY [Rate of Interest] SECTION 1. The rate of interest upon the loan or forbearance of any money, goods, or things in action, or on accounts after demand, shall be 7 percent per annum but it shall be competent for the parties to any loan or forbearance of any money, goods or things in action to contract in writing for a rate of interest: (1) For any loan or forbearance of any money, goods, or things in action, if the money, goods, or things in action are for use primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, at a rate not exceeding 10 percent per an-num; provided, however, that any loan or forbearance of any money, goods or things in action the proceeds of which are used primarily for the pur-chase, construction or improvement of real property shall not be deemed to be a use primarily for personal, family or household purposes; or * New Article XV adopted June 8, 1976. (2) For any loan or forbearance of any money, goods, or things in action for any use other than specified in paragraph (1), at a rate not exceeding the higher of (a) 10 percent per annum or (b) 5 percent per annum plus the rate prevailing on the 25th day of the month preceding the earlier of (i) the date of execution of the contract to make the loan or forbearance, or (ii) the date of making the loan or forbearance established by the Federal Re-serve Bank of San Francisco on advances to member banks under Sections 13 and 13a of the Federal Reserve Act as now in effect or hereafter from time to time amended (or if there is no such single determinable rate of advances, the closest counterpart of such rate as shall be designated by the Superintendent of Banks of the State of California unless some other per-son or agency is delegated such authority by the Legislature). [Charges] No person, association, copartnership or corporation shall by charging any fee, bonus, commission, discount or other compensation receive from a borrower more than the interest authorized by this section upon any loan or forbearance of any money, goods or things in action. [Exemptions] However, none of the above restrictions shall apply to any obligations of, loans made by, or forbearances of, any building and loan association as defined in and which is operated under that certain act known as the “Building and Loan Association Act,” approved May 5, 1931, as amended, or to any corporation incorporated in the manner prescribed in and operat-ing under that certain act entitled “An act defning industrial loan compa-nies, providing for their incorporation, powers and supervision,” approved May 18, 1917, as amended, or any corporation incorporated in the manner prescribed in and operating under that certain act entitled “An act defning credit unions, providing for their incorporation, powers, management and supervision,” approved March 31, 1927, as amended or any duly licensed pawnbroker or personal property broker, or any loans made or arranged by any person licensed as a real estate broker by the State of California and secured in whole or in part by liens on real property, or any bank as defined in and operating under that certain act known as the “Bank Act,” approved March 1, 1909, as amended, or any bank created and operating under and pursuant to any laws of this State or of the United States of America or any nonprofit cooperative association organized under Chapter 1 (commenc-ing with Section 54001) of Division 20 of the Food and Agricultural Code in loaning or advancing money in connection with any activity mentioned in said title or any corporation, association, syndicate, joint stock compa-ny, or partnership engaged exclusively in the business of marketing agri-cultural, horticultural, viticultural, dairy, live stock, poultry and bee prod-ucts on a cooperative nonprofit basis in loaning or advancing money to the members thereof or in connection with any such business or any corpora-tion securing money or credit from any federal intermediate credit bank, organized and existing pursuant to the provisions of an act of Congress entitled “Agricultural Credits Act of 1923,” as amended in loaning or ad-vancing credit so secured, or any other class of persons authorized by stat-ute, or to any successor in interest to any loan or forbearance exempted under this article, nor shall any such charge of any said exempted classes of persons be considered in any action or for any purpose as increasing or affecting or as connected with the rate of interest hereinbefore fxed. The Legislature may from time to time prescribe the maximum rate per annum of, or provide for the supervision, or the fling of a schedule of, or in any manner fx, regulate or limit, the fees, bonuses, commissions, discounts or other compensation which all or any of the said exempted classes of per-sons may charge or receive from a borrower in connection with any loan or forbearance of any money, goods or things in action. [Judgments Rendered in Court—Rate of Interest] The rate of interest upon a judgment rendered in any court of this State shall be set by the Legislature at not more than 10 percent per annum. Such rate may be variable and based upon interest rates charged by federal agen-cies or economic indicators, or both. In the absence of the setting of such rate by the Legislature, the rate of interest on any judgment rendered in any court of the State shall be 7 per-cent per annum. [Scope of Section] The provisions of this section shall supersede all provisions of this Con-stitution and laws enacted thereunder in conflict therewith. [As amended November 6, 1979.] SEC. 2. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] SEC. 3. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] ARTICLE XVI PUBLIC FINANCE [Heading as amended November 5, 1974.] [State Indebtedness—Limitation—Two-thirds Vote to Submit Bond Law— Submission of Law to Electors] SECTION 1. The Legislature shall not, in any manner create any debt or debts, liability or liabilities, which shall, singly or in the aggregate with any previous debts or liabilities, exceed the sum of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000), except in case of war to repel invasion or suppress in-surrection, unless the same shall be authorized by law for some single ob-ject or work to be distinctly specified therein which law shall provide ways and means, exclusive of loans, for the payment of the interest of such debt or liability as it falls due, and also to pay and discharge the principal of such debt or liability within 50 years of the time of the contracting thereof, and shall be irrepealable until the principal and interest thereon shall be paid and discharged, and such law may make provision for a sinking fund to pay the principal of such debt or liability to commence at a time after the incurring of such debt or liability of not more than a period of one-fourth of the time of maturity of such debt or liability; but no such law shall take effect unless it has been passed by a two-thirds vote of all the members elected to each house of the Legislature and until, at a general election or at a direct primary, it shall have been submitted to the people and shall have received a majority of all the votes cast for and against it at such elec-tion; and all moneys raised by authority of such law shall be applied only to the specifc object therein stated or to the payment of the debt thereby created. Full publicity as to matters to be voted upon by the people is af-forded by the setting out of the complete text of the proposed laws, togeth-er with the arguments for and against them, in the ballot pamphlet mailed to each elector preceding the election at which they are submitted, and the only requirement for publication of such law shall be that it be set out at length in ballot pamphlets which the Secretary of State shall cause to be printed. The Legislature may, at any time after the approval of such law by the people, reduce the amount of the indebtedness authorized by the law to an amount not less than the amount contracted at the time of the reduc-tion, or it may repeal the law if no debt shall have been contracted in pur-suance thereof. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, Members of the Legislature who are required to meet with the State Allocation Board shall have equal rights and duties with the nonlegislative members to vote and act upon matters pending or coming before such board for the alloca-tion and apportionment of funds to school districts for school construction purposes or purposes related thereto. Notwithstanding any other provision of this constitution, or of any bond act to the contrary, if any general obligation bonds of the State heretofore or hereafter authorized by vote of the people have been offered for sale and not sold, the Legislature may raise the maximum rate of interest payable on all general obligation bonds authorized but not sold, whether or not such bonds have been offered for sale, by a statute passed by a two-thirds vote of all members elected to each house thereof. The provisions of Senate Bill No. 763 † of the 1969 Regular Session, which authorize an increase of the state general obligation bond maximum interest rate from 5 percent to an amount not in excess of 7 percent and eliminate the maximum rate of interest payable on notes given in anticipa- † Chapter 740. tion of the sale of such bonds, are hereby ratifed. [As amended June 2, 1970.] [Budget Defcits] SEC. 1.3. (a) For the purposes of Section 1, a “single object or work,” for which the Legislature may create a debt or liability in excess of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) subject to the requirements set forth in Section 1, includes the funding of an accumulated state budget defcit to the extent, and in the amount, that funding is authorized in a measure sub-mitted to the voters at the March 2, 2004, statewide primary election. (b) As used in subdivision (a), “accumulated state budget defcit” means the aggregate of both of the following, as certified by the Director of Fi-nance: (1) The estimated negative balance of the Special Fund for Economic Uncertainties arising on or before June 30, 2004, not including the effect of the estimated amount of net proceeds of any bonds issued or to be is-sued pursuant to the California Fiscal Recovery Financing Act (Title 17 (commencing with Section 99000) of the Government Code) and any bonds issued or to be issued pursuant to the measure submitted to the vot-ers at the March 2, 2004, statewide primary election as described in sub-division (a). (2) Other General Fund obligations incurred by the State prior to June 30, 2004, to the extent not included in that negative balance. (c) Subsequent to the issuance of any state bonds described in subdivi-sion (a), the State may not obtain moneys to fund a year-end state budget defcit, as may be defined by statute, pursuant to any of the following: (1) indebtedness incurred pursuant to Section 1 of this article, (2) a debt obli-gation under which funds to repay that obligation are derived solely from a designated source of revenue, or (3) a bond or similar instrument for the borrowing of moneys for which there is no legal obligation of repayment. This subdivision does not apply to funding obtained through a short-term obligation incurred in anticipation of the receipt of tax proceeds or other revenues that may be applied to the payment of that obligation, for the pur-poses and not exceeding the amounts of existing appropriations to which the resulting proceeds are to be applied. For purposes of this subdivision, “year-end state budget defcit” does not include an obligation within the accumulated state budget defcit as defined by subdivision (b). [New sec-tion adopted March 2, 2004.] [General Obligation Bond Proceeds Fund] SEC. 1.5. The Legislature may create and establish a “General Obliga-tion Bond Proceeds Fund” in the State Treasury, and may provide for the proceeds of the sale of general obligation bonds of the State heretofore or hereafter issued, including any sums paid as accrued interest thereon, un-der any or all acts authorizing the issuance of such bonds, to be paid into or transferred to, as the case may be, the “General Obligation Bond Pro-ceeds Fund.” Accounts shall be maintained in the “General Obligation Bond Proceeds Fund” of all moneys deposited in the State Treasury to the credit of that fund and the proceeds of each bond issue shall be maintained as a separate and distinct account and shall be paid out only in accordance with the law authorizing the issuance of the particular bonds from which the proceeds were derived. The Legislature may abolish, subject to the conditions of this section, any fund in the State Treasury heretofore or hereafter created by any act for the purpose of having deposited therein the proceeds from the issuance of bonds if such proceeds are transferred to or paid into the “General Obligation Bond Proceeds Fund” pursuant to the authority granted in this section; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prevent the Legislature from re-establishing any bond pro-ceeds fund so abolished and transferring back to its credit all proceeds in the “General Obligation Bond Proceeds Fund” which constitute the pro-ceeds of the particular bond fund being re-established. [New section ad-opted November 6, 1962.] SEC. 2. [Repealed November 6, 1962. See Section 2, below.] [Bond Issues—Submission by Constitutional Amendment Prohibited— Repeal of Certain Constitutional Provisions] SEC. 2. (a) No amendment to this Constitution which provides for the preparation, issuance and sale of bonds of the State of California shall hereafter be submitted to the electors, nor shall any such amendment to the Constitution hereafter submitted to or approved by the electors become ef-fective for any purpose. Each measure providing for the preparation, issuance and sale of bonds of the State of California shall hereafter be submitted to the electors in the form of a bond act or statute. (b) The provisions of this Constitution enumerated in subdivision (c) of this section are repealed and such provisions are continued as statutes which have been approved, adopted, legalized, ratifed, validated, and made fully and completely effective, by means of the adoption by the elec-torate of a ratifying constitutional amendment, except that the Legislature, in addition to whatever powers it possessed under such provisions, may amend or repeal such provisions when the bonds issued thereunder have been fully retired and when no rights thereunder will be damaged. (c) The enumerated provisions of this Constitution are: Article XVI, Sections 2, 3, 4, 4, 5, 6, 8, 8, 15, 16, 16.5, 17, 18, 19, 19.5, 20 and 21. [New section adopted November 6, 1962.] [Appropriations] SEC. 3. No money shall ever be appropriated or drawn from the State Treasury for the purpose or benefit of any corporation, association, asylum, hospital, or any other institution not under the exclusive management and control of the State as a state institution, nor shall any grant or donation of property ever be made thereto by the State, except that notwithstanding anything contained in this or any other section of the Constitution: [Federal Funds] (1) Whenever federal funds are made available for the construction of hospital facilities by public agencies and nonprofit corporations organized to construct and maintain such facilities, nothing in this Constitution shall prevent the Legislature from making state money available for that purpose, or from authorizing the use of such money for the construction of hospital facilities by nonprofit corporations organized to construct and maintain such facilities. [Institution for Support of Orphans or Aged Indigents] (2) The Legislature shall have the power to grant aid to the institutions conducted for the support and maintenance of minor orphans, or half-orphans, or abandoned children, or children of a father who is incapacitated for gainful work by permanent physical disability or is suffering from tuberculosis in such a stage that he cannot pursue a gainful occupation, or aged persons in indigent circumstances—such aid to be granted by a uniform rule, and proportioned to the number of inmates of such respective institutions. [Needy Blind] (3) The Legislature shall have the power to grant aid to needy blind persons not inmates of any institution supported in whole or in part by the State or by any of its political subdivisions, and no person concerned with the administration of aid to needy blind persons shall dictate how any applicant or recipient shall expend such aid granted him, and all money paid to a recipient of such aid shall be intended to help him meet his individual needs and is not for the benefit of any other person, and such aid when granted shall not be construed as income to any person other than the blind recipient of such aid, and the State Department of Social Welfare shall take all necessary action to enforce the provisions relating to aid to needy blind persons as heretofore stated. [Physically Handicapped Persons] (4) The Legislature shall have power to grant aid to needy physically handicapped persons not inmates of any institution under the supervision of the Department of Mental Hygiene and supported in whole or in part by the State or by any institution supported in whole or part by any political subdivision of the State. [Management of Institutions] (5) The State shall have at any time the right to inquire into the manage-ment of such institutions. [Orphans, Aged Indigents, Needy Blind—County Support] (6) Whenever any county, or city and county, or city, or town, shall pro-vide for the support of minor orphans, or half-orphans, or abandoned chil-dren, or children of a father who is incapacitated for gainful work by per-manent physical disability or is suffering from tuberculosis in such a stage that he cannot pursue a gainful occupation, or aged persons in indigent circumstances, or needy blind persons not inmates of any institution sup-ported in whole or in part by the State or by any of its political subdivi-sions, or needy physically handicapped persons not inmates of any institu-tion under the supervision of the Department of Mental Hygiene and supported in whole or in part by the State or by any institution supported in whole or part by any political subdivision of the State; such county, city and county, city, or town shall be entitled to receive the same pro rata ap-propriations as may be granted to such institutions under church, or other control. [Receipts and Expenditures of Public Moneys] An accurate statement of the receipts and expenditures of public moneys shall be attached to and published with the laws at every regular session of the Legislature. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Medi-Cal Hospital Reimbursement Improvement Act of 2013] SEC. 3.5. (a) No statute amending or adding to the pro visions of the Medi-Cal Hospital Reimbursement Improvement Act of 2013 shall be-come effective unless approved by the electors in the same manner as stat-utes amending initiative statutes pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 10 of Article II, except that the Legislature may, by statute passed in each house by roll call vote entered into the journal, two-thirds of the member-ship concurring, amend or add provisions that further the purposes of the act. (b) For purposes of this section: (1) “Act” means the Medi-Cal Hospital Reimbursement Improvement Act of 2013 (enacted by Senate Bill 239 of the 2013–14 Regular Session of the Legislature, and any nonsubstantive amendments to the act enacted by a later bill in the same session of the Legislature). (2) “Nonsubstantive amendments” shall only mean minor, technical, grammatical, or clarifying amendments. (3) “Provisions that further the purposes of the act” shall only mean: (A) Amendments or additions necessary to obtain or maintain federal approval of the implementation of the act, including the fee imposed and related quality assurance payments to hospitals made pursuant to the act; (B) Amendments or additions to the methodology used for the develop-ment of the fee and quality assurance payments to hospitals made pursuant to the act. (c) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Legislature from repealing the act in its entirety by statute passed in each house by roll call vote en-tered into the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring, except that the Legislature shall not be permitted to repeal the act and replace it with a similar statute imposing a tax, fee, or assessment unless that similar statute is either: (1) A provision that furthers the purposes of the act as defined herein; (2) Is approved by the electors in the same manner as statutes amending initiative statutes pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 10 of Article II. (d) The proceeds of the fee imposed by the act and all interest earned on such proceeds shall not be considered revenues, General Fund revenues, General Fund proceeds of taxes, or allocated local proceeds of taxes, for purposes of Sections 8 and 8.5 of this article or for the purposes of Article XIII B. The appropriation of the proceeds in the trust fund referred to in the act for hospital services to Medi-Cal benefciaries or other benefcia-ries in any other similar federal program shall not be subject to the prohi-bitions or restrictions in Sections 3 or 5 of this article. [New Section ad-opted November 8, 2016. Initiative measure.] [Loan Guarantees re Nonprofit Corporations and Public Agencies] SEC. 4. The Legislature shall have the power to insure or guarantee loans made by private or public lenders to nonprofit corporations and pub-lic agencies, the proceeds of which are to be used for the construction, ex-pansion, enlargement, improvement, renovation or repair of any public or nonprofit hospital, hospital facility, or extended care facility, facility for the treatment of mental illness, or all of them, including any outpatient fa-cility and any other facility useful and convenient in the operation of the hospital and any original equipment for any such hospital or facility, or both. No provision of this Constitution, including but not limited to, Section 1 of Article XVI and Section 14 of Article XI, shall be construed as a limita-tion upon the authority granted to the Legislature by this section. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] SEC. 4. [Repealed November 6, 1962.] [Religious Institutions—Grants Prohibited] SEC. 5. Neither the Legislature, nor any county, city and county, town-ship, school district, or other municipal corporation, shall ever make an appropriation, or pay from any public fund whatever, or grant anything to or in aid of any religious sect, church, creed, or sectarian purpose, or help to support or sustain any school, college, university, hospital, or other in-stitution controlled by any religious creed, church, or sectarian denomina-tion whatever; nor shall any grant or donation of personal property or real estate ever be made by the State, or any city, city and county, town, or other municipal corporation for any religious creed, church, or sectarian purpose whatever; provided, that nothing in this section shall prevent the Legislature granting aid pursuant to Section 3 of Article XVI. [New sec-tion adopted November 5, 1974.] [Gifts or Loans of Public Moneys or Pledging of Credit Prohibited—Stock of Corporations] SEC. 6. The Legislature shall have no power to give or to lend, or to authorize the giving or lending, of the credit of the State, or of any county, city and county, city, township or other political corporation or subdivision of the State now existing, or that may be hereafter established, in aid of or to any person, association, or corporation, whether municipal or other-wise, or to pledge the credit thereof, in any manner whatever, for the pay-ment of the liabilities of any individual, association, municipal or other corporation whatever; nor shall it have power to make any gift or authorize the making of any gift, of any public money or thing of value to any indi-vidual, municipal or other corporation whatever; provided, that nothing in this section shall prevent the Legislature granting aid pursuant to Section 3 of Article XVI; and it shall not have power to authorize the State, or any political subdivision thereof, to subscribe for stock, or to become a stock-holder in any corporation whatever; provided, further, that irrigation dis-tricts for the purpose of acquiring the control of any entire international water system necessary for its use and purposes, a part of which is situated in the United States, and a part thereof in a foreign country, may in the manner authorized by law, acquire the stock of any foreign corporation which is the owner of, or which holds the title to the part of such system situated in a foreign country; provided, further, that irrigation districts for the purpose of acquiring water and water rights and other property neces-sary for their uses and purposes, may acquire and hold the stock of corpo-rations, domestic or foreign, owning waters, water rights, canals, water-works, franchises or concessions subject to the same obligations and liabilities as are imposed by law upon all other stockholders in such cor-poration; and [Insurance Pooling Arrangements] Provided, further, that this section shall not prohibit any county, city and county, city, township, or other political corporation or subdivision of the State from joining with other such agencies in providing for the payment of workers’ compensation, unemployment compensation, tort liability, or public liability losses incurred by such agencies, by entry into an insurance pooling arrangement under a joint exercise of powers agreement, or by membership in such publicly-owned nonprofit corporation or other public agency as may be authorized by the Legislature; and [Aid to Veterans] Provided, further, that nothing contained in this Constitution shall pro-hibit the use of state money or credit, in aiding veterans who served in the military or naval service of the United States during the time of war, in the acquisition of, or payments for, (1) farms or homes, or in projects of land settlement or in the development of such farms or homes or land settle-ment projects for the benefit of such veterans, or (2) any business, land or any interest therein, buildings, supplies, equipment, machinery, or tools, to be used by the veteran in pursuing a gainful occupation; and [Disaster Assistance] Provided, further, that nothing contained in this Constitution shall pro-hibit the State, or any county, city and county, city, township, or other po-litical corporation or subdivision of the State from providing aid or assis-tance to persons, if found to be in the public interest, for the purpose of clearing debris, natural materials, and wreckage from privately owned lands and waters deposited thereon or therein during a period of a major disaster or emergency, in either case declared by the President. In such case, the public entity shall be indemnifed by the recipient from the award of any claim against the public entity arising from the rendering of such aid or assistance. Such aid or assistance must be eligible for federal reim-bursement for the cost thereof. [Temporary Transfers of Funds to Political Subdivisions] And provided, still further, that notwithstanding the restrictions con-tained in this Constitution, the treasurer of any city, county, or city and county shall have power and the duty to make such temporary transfers from the funds in custody as may be necessary to provide funds for meet-ing the obligations incurred for maintenance purposes by any city, county, city and county, district, or other political subdivision whose funds are in custody and are paid out solely through the treasurer’s office. Such tempo-rary transfer of funds to any political subdivision shall be made only upon resolution adopted by the governing body of the city, county, or city and county directing the treasurer of such city, county, or city and county to make such temporary transfer. Such temporary transfer of funds to any po-litical subdivision shall not exceed 85 percent of the anticipated revenues accruing to such political subdivision, shall not be made prior to the first day of the fiscal year nor after the last Monday in April of the current fs-cal year, and shall be replaced from the revenues accruing to such political subdivision before any other obligation of such political subdivision is met from such revenue. [As amended November 2, 1982.] [Controller’s Warrants] SEC. 7. Money may be drawn from the Treasury only through an ap-propriation made by law and upon a Controller’s duly drawn warrant. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [School Funding Priority] SEC. 8. (a) From all state revenues there shall first be set apart the moneys to be applied by the State for support of the public school system and public institutions of higher education. (b) Commencing with the 1990–91 fiscal year, the moneys to be applied by the State for the support of school districts and community college dis-tricts shall be not less than the greater of the following amounts: (1) The amount which, as a percentage of General Fund revenues which may be appropriated pursuant to Article XIII B, equals the percentage of General Fund revenues appropriated for school districts and community college districts, respectively, in fiscal year 1986–87. (2) The amount required to ensure that the total allocations to school districts and community college districts from General Fund proceeds of taxes appropriated pursuant to Article XIII B and allocated local proceeds of taxes shall not be less than the total amount from these sources in the prior fiscal year, excluding any revenues allocated pursuant to subdivision (a)of Section 8.5, adjusted for changes in enrollment and adjusted for the change in the cost of living pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of Section 8 of Article XIII B. This paragraph shall be operative only in a fs-cal year in which the percentage growth in California per capita personal income is less than or equal to the percentage growth in per capita Gen-eral Fund revenues plus one half of one percent. (3) (A) The amount required to ensure that the total allocations to school districts and community college districts from General Fund pro-ceeds of taxes appropriated pursuant to Article XIII B and allocated local proceeds of taxes shall equal the total amount from these sources in the prior fiscal year, excluding any revenues allocated pursuant to subdivision (a)of Section 8.5, adjusted for changes in enrollment and adjusted for the change in per capita General Fund revenues. (B) In addition, an amount equal to one-half of one percent times the prior year total allocations to school districts and community colleges from General Fund proceeds of taxes appropriated pursuant to Article XIII B and allocated local proceeds of taxes, excluding any revenues allocated pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 8.5, adjusted for changes in enroll-ment. (C) This paragraph (3) shall be operative only in a fiscal year in which the percentage growth in California per capita personal income in a fiscal year is greater than the percentage growth in per capita General Fund rev-enues plus one half of one percent. (c) In any fiscal year, if the amount computed pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) exceeds the amount computed pursuant to paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) by a difference that exceeds one and one-half percent of General Fund revenues, the amount in excess of one and one-half percent of General Fund revenues shall not be considered allocations to school districts and community colleges for purposes of computing the amount of state aid pursuant to paragraph (2) or 3 of subdivision (b) in the subsequent fiscal year. (d) In any fiscal year in which school districts and community college districts are allocated funding pursuant to paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) or pursuant to subdivision (h), they shall be entitled to a maintenance factor, equal to the difference between (1) the amount of General Fund moneys which would have been appropriated pursuant to paragraph (2) of sub-division (b) if that paragraph had been operative or the amount of General Fund moneys which would have been appropriated pursuant to subdivision (b) had subdivision (b) not been suspended, and (2) the amount of General Fund moneys actually appropriated to school districts and community college districts in that fiscal year. (e) The maintenance factor for school districts and community college districts determined pursuant to subdivision (d) shall be adjusted annually for changes in enrollment, and adjusted for the change in the cost of living pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of Section 8 of Article XIII B, until it has been allocated in full. The maintenance factor shall be allocated in a manner determined by the Legislature in each fiscal year in which the percentage growth in per capita General Fund revenues exceeds the percentage growth in California per capita personal income. The maintenance factor shall be reduced each year by the amount allocated by the Legislature in that fiscal year. The minimum maintenance factor amount to be allocated in a fiscal year shall be equal to the product of General Fund revenues from proceeds of taxes and one-half of the difference between the percentage growth in per capita General Fund revenues from proceeds of taxes and in California per capita personal income, not to exceed the total dollar amount of the maintenance factor. (f) For purposes of this section, “changes in enrollment” shall be measured by the percentage change in average daily attendance. However, in any fiscal year, there shall be no adjustment for decreases in enrollment between the prior fiscal year and the current fiscal year unless there have been decreases in enrollment between the second prior fiscal year and the prior fiscal year and between the third prior fiscal year and the second prior fiscal year. (h) Subparagraph (B) of paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) may be suspended for one year only when made part of or included within any bill enacted pursuant to Section 12 of Article IV. All other provisions of subdivision (b) may be suspended for one year by the enactment of an urgency statute pursuant to Section 8 of Article IV, provided that the urgency statute may not be made part of or included within any bill enacted pursuant to Section 12 of Article IV. [As amended June 5, 1990. Operative July 1, 1990.] SEC. 8. [Repealed November 6, 1962.] [Allocations to State School Fund] SEC. 8.5. (a) In addition to the amount required to be applied for the support of school districts and community college districts pursuant to Section 8, the Controller shall during each fiscal year transfer and allocate all revenues available pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision (a) of Section 2 of Article XIII B to that portion of the State School Fund restricted for elementary and high school purposes, and to that portion of the State School Fund restricted for community college purposes, respectively, in proportion to the enrollment in school districts and community college districts respectively. (1) With respect to funds allocated to that portion of the State School Fund restricted for elementary and high school purposes, no transfer or al-location of funds pursuant to this section shall be required at any time that the Director of Finance and the Superintendent of Public Instruction mutu-ally determine that current annual expenditures per student equal or ex-ceed the average annual expenditure per student of the 10 states with the highest annual expenditures per student for elementary and high schools, and that average class size equals or is less than the average class size of the 10 states with the lowest class size for elementary and high schools. (2) With respect to funds allocated to that portion of the State School Fund restricted for community college purposes, no transfer or allocation of funds pursuant to this section shall be required at any time that the Di-rector of Finance and the Chancellor of the California Community Col-leges mutually determine that current annual expenditures per student for community colleges in this State equal or exceed the average annual ex-penditure per student of the 10 states with the highest annual expenditures per student for community colleges. (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of Article XIII B, funds allocated pursuant to this section shall not constitute appropriations subject to limi-tation. (c) From any funds transferred to the State School Fund pursuant to subdivision (a), the Controller shall each year allocate to each school dis-trict and community college district an equal amount per enrollment in school districts from the amount in that portion of the State School Fund restricted for elementary and high school purposes and an equal amount per enrollment in community college districts from that portion of the State School Fund restricted for community college purposes. (d) All revenues allocated pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be expended solely for the purposes of instructional improvement and accountability as required by law. (e) Any school district maintaining an elementary or secondary school shall develop and cause to be prepared an annual audit accounting for such funds and shall adopt a School Accountability Report Card for each school. [As amended June 5, 1990. Operative July 1, 1990.] [Fish and Game] SEC. 9. Money collected under any state law relating to the protection or propagation of fish and game shall be used for activities relating thereto. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Aged Aid—Federal-State Co-operation] SEC. 10. Whenever the United States government or any officer or agency thereof shall provide pensions or other aid for the aged, co-opera-tion by the State therewith and therein is hereby authorized in such manner and to such extent as may be provided by law. The money expended by any county, city and county, municipality, dis-trict or other political subdivision of this State made available under the provisions of this section shall not be considered as a part of the base for determining the maximum expenditure for any given year permissible un-der Section 20 † of Article XI of this Constitution independent of the vote of the electors or authorization by the State Board of Equalization. [As amended November 6, 1962.] [Relief Administration] SEC. 11. The Legislature has plenary power to provide for the admin-istration of any constitutional provisions or laws heretofore or hereafter enacted concerning the administration of relief, and to that end may mod-ify, transfer, or enlarge the powers vested in any state agency or officer concerned with the administration of relief or laws appertaining thereto. The Legislature, or the people by initiative, shall have power to amend, alter, or repeal any law relating to the relief of hardship and destitution, whether such hardship and destitution results from unemployment or from other causes, or to provide for the administration of the relief of hardship and destitution, whether resulting from unemployment or from other causes, either directly by the State or through the counties of the State, and to grant such aid to the counties therefor, or make such provision for reim- † Section 20, Article XI, repealed June 2, 1970. bursement of the counties by the State, as the Legislature deems proper. [As amended November 6, 1962.] SEC. 12. [Repealed November 6, 1962.] [Legislative Power to Release Encumbrances Taken as Security for Aid to Aged] SEC. 13. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, the Legislature shall have power to release, rescind, cancel, or otherwise nullify in whole or in part any encumbrance on property, personal obligation, or other form of security heretofore or hereafter exacted or imposed by the Legislature to secure the repayment to, or reimbursement of, the State, and the counties or other agencies of the state government, of aid lawfully granted to and received by aged persons. [As amended November 6, 1962.] [Bonds—Environmental Pollution Control Facilities] SEC. 14. The Legislature may provide for the issuance of revenue bonds to fnance the acquisition, construction, and installation of environmental pollution control facilities, including the acquisition of all technological facilities necessary or convenient for pollution control, and for the lease or sale of such facilities to persons, associations, or corporations, other than municipal corporations; provided, that such revenue bonds shall not be secured by the taxing power of the State; and provided, further, that the Legislature may, by resolution adopted by either house, prohibit or limit any proposed issuance of such revenue bonds. No provision of this Constitution, including, but not limited to, Section 25 of Article XIII and Sections 1 and 2 of Article XVI, shall be construed as a limitation upon the authority granted to the Legislature pursuant to this section. Nothing herein contained shall authorize any public agency to operate any industrial or commercial enterprise. [New section adopted November 7, 1972.] [Energy Alternative Sources Facilities—Acquisition, Construction, Etc.—Revenue Bond Issuance] SEC. 14.5. The Legislature may provide for the issuance of revenue bonds to fnance the acquisition, construction, and installation of facilities utilizing cogeneration technology, solar power, biomass, or any other alternative source the Legislature may deem appropriate, including the acquisition of all technological facilities necessary or convenient for the use of alternative sources, and for the lease or sale of such facilities to persons, associations, or corporations, other than municipal corporations; provided, that such revenue bonds shall not be secured by the taxing power of the State; and provided, further, that the Legislature may, by resolution adopted by both houses, prohibit or limit any proposed issuance of such revenue bonds. No provision of this Constitution, including, but not limited to, Sections 1, 2, and 6, of this article, shall be construed as a limitation upon the authority granted to the Legislature pursuant to this section. Nothing contained herein shall authorize any public agency to operate any industrial or commercial enterprise. [New section adopted June 3, 1980.] [Parking Meter Revenues] SEC. 15. A public body authorized to issue securities to provide public parking facilities and any other public body whose territorial area includes such facilities are authorized to make revenues from street parking meters available as additional security. [New section adopted November 5, 1974.] [Taxation of Redevelopment Projects] SEC. 16. All property in a redevelopment project established under the Community Redevelopment Law as now existing or hereafter amended, except publicly owned property not subject to taxation by rea-son of that ownership, shall be taxed in proportion to its value as provided in Section 1 of this article, and those taxes (the word “taxes” as used here-in includes, but is not limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property) shall be levied and collected as other taxes are levied and collected by the respective taxing agencies. The Legislature may provide that any redevelopment plan may contain a provision that the taxes, if any, so levied upon the taxable property in a re-development project each year by or for the benefit of the State of Califor-nia, any city, county, city and county, district, or other public corporation (hereinafter sometimes called “taxing agencies”) after the effective date of the ordinance approving the redevelopment plan, shall be divided as fol-lows: (a) That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate upon which the tax is levied each year by or for each of those taxing agencies upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the re-development project as shown upon the assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of that property by the taxing agency, last equalized prior to the effective date of the ordinance, shall be allocated to, and when col-lected shall be paid into, the funds of the respective taxing agencies as taxes by or for those taxing agencies on all other property are paid (for the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing agency or agencies which did not include the territory in a redevelopment project on the effec-tive date of the ordinance but to which that territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the ordinance’s effective date, the assessment roll of the county last equalized on the effective date of that ordinance shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the project on that effective date); and (b) Except as provided in subdivision (c), that portion of the levied tax-es each year in excess of that amount shall be allocated to and when col-lected shall be paid into a special fund of the redevelopment agency to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to, or indebtedness (whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise) incurred by the rede-velopment agency to fnance or refnance, in whole or in part, the redevel-opment project. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in a redevelopment project exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in the project as shown by the last equalized assessment roll referred to in subdivision (a), all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the redevelopment project shall be paid into the funds of the respective taxing agencies. When the loans, advances, and in-debtedness, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, then all moneys thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the redevelop-ment project shall be paid into the funds of the respective taxing agencies as taxes on all other property are paid. (c) That portion of the taxes identifed in subdivision (b) which are at-tributable to a tax rate levied by a taxing agency for the purpose of produc-ing revenues in an amount suffcient to make annual repayments of the principal of, and the interest on, any bonded indebtedness for the acquisi-tion or improvement of real property shall be allocated to, and when col-lected shall be paid into, the fund of that taxing agency. This paragraph shall only apply to taxes levied to repay bonded indebtedness approved by the voters of the taxing agency on or after January 1, 1989. The Legislature may also provide that in any redevelopment plan or in the proceedings for the advance of moneys, or making of loans, or the in-curring of any indebtedness (whether funded, refunded, assumed, or oth-erwise) by the redevelopment agency to fnance or refnance, in whole or in part, the redevelopment project, the portion of taxes identifed in subdi-vision (b), exclusive of that portion identifed in subdivision (c), may be irrevocably pledged for the payment of the principal of and interest on those loans, advances, or indebtedness. It is intended by this section to empower any redevelopment agency, city, county, or city and county under any law authorized by this section to ex-ercise the provisions hereof separately or in combination with powers granted by the same or any other law relative to redevelopment agencies. This section shall not affect any other law or laws relating to the same or a similar subject but is intended to authorize an alternative method of pro-cedure governing the subject to which it refers. The Legislature shall enact those laws as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this section. [As amended November 8, 1988.] SEC. 16.5. [Repealed November 6, 1962.] [State’s Credit—Investment of Public Pension or Retirement Funds] SEC. 17. The State shall not in any manner loan its credit, nor shall it subscribe to, or be interested in the stock of any company, association, or corporation, except that the State and each political subdivision, district, municipality, and public agency thereof is hereby authorized to acquire and hold shares of the capital stock of any mutual water company or cor-poration when the stock is so acquired or held for the purpose of furnish-ing a supply of water for public, municipal or governmental purposes; and the holding of the stock shall entitle the holder thereof to all of the rights, powers and privileges, and shall subject the holder to the obligations and liabilities conferred or imposed by law upon other holders of stock in the mutual water company or corporation in which the stock is so held. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law or this Constitution to the contrary, the retirement board of a public pension or retirement system shall have plenary authority and fduciary responsibility for investment of moneys and administration of the system, subject to all of the following: (a) The retirement board of a public pension or retirement system shall have the sole and exclusive fduciary responsibility over the assets of the public pension or retirement system. The retirement board shall also have sole and exclusive responsibility to administer the system in a manner that will assure prompt delivery of benefits and related services to the partici-pants and their benefciaries. The assets of a public pension or retirement system are trust funds and shall be held for the exclusive purposes of pro-viding benefits to participants in the pension or retirement system and their benefciaries and defraying reasonable expenses of administering the sys-tem. (b) The members of the retirement board of a public pension or retire-ment system shall discharge their duties with respect to the system solely in the interest of, and for the exclusive purposes of providing benefits to, participants and their benefciaries, minimizing employer contributions thereto, and defraying reasonable expenses of administering the system. A retirement board’s duty to its participants and their benefciaries shall take precedence over any other duty. (c) The members of the retirement board of a public pension or retire-ment system shall discharge their duties with respect to the system with the care, skill, prudence, and diligence under the circumstances then pre-vailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity and familiar with these matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a like character and with like aims. (d) The members of the retirement board of a public pension or retire-ment system shall diversify the investments of the system so as to mini-mize the risk of loss and to maximize the rate of return, unless under the circumstances it is clearly not prudent to do so. (e) The retirement board of a public pension or retirement system, con-sistent with the exclusive fduciary responsibilities vested in it, shall have the sole and exclusive power to provide for actuarial services in order to assure the competency of the assets of the public pension or retirement system. (f) With regard to the retirement board of a public pension or retirement system which includes in its composition elected employee members, the number, terms, and method of selection or removal of members of the re-tirement board which were required by law or otherwise in effect on July 1, 1991, shall not be changed, amended, or modifed by the Legislature unless the change, amendment, or modifcation enacted by the Legislature is ratifed by a majority vote of the electors of the jurisdiction in which the participants of the system are or were, prior to retirement, employed. (g) The Legislature may by statute continue to prohibit certain invest-ments by a retirement board where it is in the public interest to do so, and provided that the prohibition satisfes the standards of fduciary care and loyalty required of a retirement board pursuant to this section. (h) As used in this section, the term “retirement board” shall mean the board of administration, board of trustees, board of directors, or other gov-erning body or board of a public employees’ pension or retirement system; provided, however, that the term “retirement board” shall not be interpret-ed to mean or include a governing body or board created after July 1, 1991 which does not administer pension or retirement benefits, or the elected legislative body of a jurisdiction which employs participants in a public employees’ pension or retirement system. [As amended November 3, 1992. Initiative measure.] [Municipal Debt Exceeding Income] SEC. 18. (a) No county, city, town, township, board of education, or school district, shall incur any indebtedness or liability in any manner or for any purpose exceeding in any year the income and revenue provided for such year, without the assent of two-thirds of the voters of the public entity voting at an election to be held for that purpose, except that with re-spect to any such public entity which is authorized to incur indebtedness for public school purposes, any proposition for the incurrence of indebted-ness in the form of general obligation bonds for the purpose of repairing, reconstructing or replacing public school buildings determined, in the manner prescribed by law, to be structurally unsafe for school use, shall be adopted upon the approval of a majority of the voters of the public entity voting on the proposition at such election; nor unless before or at the time of incurring such indebtedness provision shall be made for the collection of an annual tax suffcient to pay the interest on such indebtedness as it falls due, and to provide for a sinking fund for the payment of the principal thereof, on or before maturity, which shall not exceed forty years from the time of contracting the indebtedness. (b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), on or after the effective date of the measure adding this subdivision, in the case of any school district, com-munity college district, or county office of education, any proposition for the incurrence of indebtedness in the form of general obligation bonds for the construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or replacement of school facilities, including the furnishing and equipping of school facilities, or the acquisition or lease of real property for school facilities, shall be adopted upon the approval of 55 percent of the voters of the district or county, as appropriate, voting on the proposition at an election. This subdivision shall apply only to a proposition for the incurrence of indebtedness in the form of general obligation bonds for the purposes specified in this subdivision if the proposition meets all of the accountability requirements of para-graph (3) of subdivision (b) of Section 1 of Article XIII A. (c) When two or more propositions for incurring any indebtedness or li-ability are submitted at the same election, the votes cast for and against each proposition shall be counted separately, and when two-thirds or a ma-jority or 55 percent of the voters, as the case may be, voting on any one of those propositions, vote in favor thereof, the proposition shall be deemed adopted. [As amended November 7, 2000. Initiative measure.] [Public Improvement Proceedings by Chartered City or County] SEC. 19. All proceedings undertaken by any chartered city, or by any chartered county or by any chartered city and county for the construction of any public improvement, or the acquisition of any property for public use, or both, where the cost thereof is to be paid in whole or in part by spe-cial assessment or other special assessment taxes upon property, whether the special assessment will be specifc or a special assessment tax upon property wholly or partially according to the assessed value of such prop-erty, shall be undertaken only in accordance with the provisions of law governing: (a) limitations of costs of such proceedings or assessments for such proceedings, or both, in relation to the value of any property assessed therefor; (b) determination of a basis for the valuation of any such prop-erty; (c) payment of the cost in excess of such limitations; (d) avoidance of such limitations; (e) postponement or abandonment, or both, of such proceedings in whole or in part upon majority protest, and particularly in accordance with such provisions as contained in Sections 10, 11 and 13a of the Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 1931 or any amendments, codifcation, reenactment or restatement thereof. Notwithstanding any provisions for debt limitation or majority protest as in this section provided, if, after the giving of such reasonable notice by publication and posting and the holding of such public hearing as the leg-islative body of any such chartered county, chartered city or chartered city and county shall have prescribed, such legislative body by no less than a four-ffths vote of all members thereof, finds and determines that the pub-lic convenience and necessity require such improvements or acquisitions, such debt limitation and majority protest provisions shall not apply. Nothing contained in this section shall require the legislative body of any such city, county, or city and county to prepare or to cause to be prepared, hear, notice for hearing or report the hearing of any report as to any such proposed construction or acquisition or both. [New section adopted No-vember 5, 1974.] SEC. 19.5. [Repealed November 6, 1962.] SEC. 20. [Repealed November 4, 2014. See Section 20, below.] [Budget Stabilization Account] SEC. 20. (a) (1) The Budget Stabilization Account is hereby created in the General Fund. (2) For the 2015–16 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter, based on the Budget Act for the fiscal year, the Controller shall transfer from the General Fund to the Budget Stabilization Account, no later than October 1, a sum equal to 1.5 percent of the estimated amount of General Fund rev-enues for that fiscal year. (b) (1) For the 2015–16 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter, based on the Budget Act for the fiscal year, the Department of Finance shall pro-vide to the Legislature all of the following information: (A) An estimate of the amount of General Fund proceeds of taxes that may be appropriated pursuant to Article XIII B for that fiscal year. (B) (i) An estimate of that portion of the General Fund proceeds of tax-es identifed in subparagraph (A) that is derived from personal income taxes paid on net capital gains. (ii) The portion of the estimate in clause (i) that exceeds 8 percent of the estimate made under subparagraph (A). (C) That portion of the state’s funding obligation under Section 8 that results from including the amount calculated under clause (ii) of subpara-graph (B), if any, as General Fund proceeds of taxes. (D) The amount of any appropriations described in clause (ii) of sub-paragraph (B) of paragraph (1) of, or subparagraph (C) of paragraph (2) of, subdivision (c), that are made from the revenues described in clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) of this paragraph. (E) The amount resulting from subtracting the combined values calcu-lated under subparagraphs (C) and (D) from the value calculated under clause (ii) of subparagraph (B). If less than zero, the amount shall be con-sidered zero for this purpose. (F) The lesser of the amount calculated under subparagraph (E) or the amount of transfer resulting in the balance in the Budget Stabilization Ac-count reaching the limit specified in subdivision (e). (2) In the 2016–17 fiscal year, with respect to the 2015–16 fiscal year only, and in the 2017–18 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter, sepa-rately with respect to each of the two next preceding fiscal years, the De-partment of Finance shall calculate all of the following, using the same methodology used for the relevant fiscal year, and provide those calcula-tions to the Legislature: (A) An updated estimate of the amount of General Fund proceeds of taxes that may be appropriated pursuant to Article XIII B. (B) (i) An updated estimate of that portion of the General Fund pro-ceeds of taxes identifed in subparagraph (A) that is derived from personal income taxes paid on net capital gains. (ii) That portion of the updated estimate in clause (i) that exceeds 8 per-cent of the updated estimate made under subparagraph (A). (C) The updated calculation of that portion of the state’s funding obliga-tion under Section 8 that results from including the updated amount calcu-lated under clause (ii) of subparagraph (B), if any, as General Fund pro-ceeds of taxes. (D) The amount of any appropriations described in clause (ii) of sub-paragraph (B) of paragraph (1) of, or subparagraph (C) of paragraph (2) of, subdivision (c), that are made from the revenues described in clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1). (E) The amount resulting from subtracting the combined values calcu-lated under subparagraphs (C) and (D) from the value calculated under clause (ii) of subparagraph (B). If less than zero, the amount shall be con-sidered zero for this purpose. (F) The amount previously transferred for the fiscal year by the Control-ler from the General Fund to the Budget Stabilization Account pursuant to subdivisions (c) and (d). (G) The lesser of (i) the amount, not less than zero, resulting from sub-tracting, from the amount calculated under subparagraph (E), the value of any suspension or reduction of transfer pursuant to paragraph (1) of sub-division (a) of Section 22 previously approved by the Legislature for the relevant fiscal year, and the amount previously transferred for that fiscal year by the Controller as described in subparagraph (F), or (ii) the amount of transfer resulting in the balance in the Budget Stabilization Account reaching the limit as specified in subdivision (e). (c) (1) (A) By October 1 of the 2015–16 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter to the 2029–30 fiscal year, inclusive, based on the estimates set forth in the annual Budget Act pursuant to paragraphs (2) and (3) of subdivision (h), and the sum identifed in paragraph (2) of subdivision (a), the Controller shall transfer amounts from the General Fund and the Bud-get Stabilization Account, pursuant to a schedule provided by the Director of Finance, as provided in subparagraph (B). (B) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in the fiscal year to which the Budget Act identifed in subparagraph (A) applies: (i) Fifty percent of both the amount identifed in paragraph (2) of subdi-vision (a), and the amount resulting from subtracting the value calculated under subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) from the value calculated under clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) of subdi-vision (b), shall be transferred from the General Fund to the Budget Stabi-lization Account. (ii) The remaining 50 percent shall be appropriated by the Legislature for one or more of the following obligations and purposes: (I) Unfunded prior fiscal year General Fund obligations pursuant to Section 8 that existed on July 1, 2014. (II) Budgetary loans to the General Fund, from funds outside the Gen-eral Fund, that had outstanding balances on January 1, 2014. (III) Payable claims for mandated costs incurred prior to the 2004–05 fiscal year that have not yet been paid, and that pursuant to paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) of Section 6 of Article XIII B are permitted to be paid over a term of years, as prescribed by law. (IV) Unfunded liabilities for state-level pension plans and prefunding other postemployment benefits, in excess of current base amounts as es-tablished for the fiscal year in which the funds would otherwise be trans-ferred to the Budget Stabilization Account. For the purpose of this sub-clause, current base amounts are those required to be paid pursuant to law, an approved memorandum of understanding, benefit schedules established by the employer or entity authorized to establish those contributions for employees excluded or exempted from collective bargaining, or any com-bination of these. To qualify under this subclause, the appropriation shall supplement and not supplant funding that would otherwise be made avail-able to pay for the obligations described in this subclause for the fiscal year or the subsequent fiscal year. (2) (A) By October 1 of the 2030–31 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter, based on the estimates set forth in the annual Budget Act pursu-ant to paragraphs (2) and (3) of subdivision (h), the Controller shall trans-fer amounts from the General Fund to the Budget Stabilization Account, pursuant to a schedule provided by the Director of Finance, as provided in subparagraph (B). (B) In the fiscal year to which the Budget Act identifed in subparagraph (A) applies, both the amount identifed in paragraph (2) of subdivision (a), and the amount resulting from subtracting the value calculated under sub-paragraph (C) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) from the value calcu-lated under clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (b), shall be transferred from the General Fund to the Budget Stabilization Account. (C) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Legislature may appropriate up to 50 percent of both the amount identifed in para-graph (2) of subdivision (a), and of the amount resulting from subtracting the value calculated under subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) of subdivi-sion (b) from the value calculated under clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (b), for one or more of the obligations and purposes described in clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1). (3) The transfers described in this subdivision are subject to suspension or reduction pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of Section 22. (d) By October 1 of the 2016–17 fiscal year and each fiscal year there-after, based on the estimates set forth in the annual Budget Act pursuant to paragraphs (4) and (5) of subdivision (h), the Controller shall transfer amounts between the General Fund and the Budget Stabilization Account pursuant to a schedule provided by the Director of Finance, as follows: (1) If the amount in subparagraph (G) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) is greater than zero, transfer that amount from the General Fund to the Budget Stabilization Account, subject to any suspension or reduction of this transfer pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of Section 22. (2) If the amount described in subparagraph (F) of paragraph (2) of sub-division (b) is greater than the amount calculated under subparagraph (E) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b), transfer that excess amount from the Budget Stabilization Account back to the General Fund. (e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the amount of a transfer to the Budget Stabilization Account pursuant to paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) and subdivisions (c) and (d) for any fiscal year shall not exceed an amount that would result in a balance in the account that, when the transfer is made, exceeds 10 percent of the amount of General Fund proceeds of taxes for the fiscal year estimated pursuant to subdivision (b). For any fiscal year, General Fund proceeds of taxes that, but for this para-graph, would have been transferred to the Budget Stabilization Account may be expended only for infrastructure, as defined by Section 13101 of the Government Code, as that section read on January 1, 2014, including deferred maintenance thereon. (f) The funds described in subdivision (b) as General Fund proceeds of taxes are General Fund proceeds of taxes for purposes of Section 8 for the fiscal year to which those proceeds are attributed, but are not deemed to be additional General Fund proceeds of taxes on the basis that the funds are thereafter transferred from the Budget Stabilization Account to the Gen-eral Fund. (g) The Controller may utilize funds in the Budget Stabilization Ac-count, that he or she determines to currently be unnecessary for the pur-poses of this section, to help manage General Fund daily cashfow needs. Any use pursuant to this subdivision shall not interfere with the purposes of the Budget Stabilization Account. (h) The annual Budget Act shall include the estimates described in all of the following: (1) Paragraph (2) of subdivision (a). (2) Clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (b). (3) Subparagraph (F) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (b). (4) Clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b). (5) Subparagraph (G) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b). [New section adopted November 4, 2014.] [Public School System Stabilization Account] SEC. 21. (a) The Public School System Stabilization Account is here-by created in the General Fund. (b) On or before October 1 of each fiscal year, commencing with the 2015–16 fiscal year, based on the amounts identifed in the annual Budget Act pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 20, the Controller shall transfer, pursuant to a schedule provided by the Director of Finance, amounts from the General Fund to the Public School System Stabilization Account as follows: (1) (A) For the 2015–16 fiscal year, and for each fiscal year thereafter, any positive amount identifed in subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 20 shall be transferred from the General Fund to the Public School System Stabilization Account in the amount calcu-lated under subparagraph (B), subject to any reduction or suspension of this transfer pursuant to any other provision of this section or paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of Section 22. (B) The Director of Finance shall calculate the amount by which the positive amount identifed in subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) of subdi-vision (b) of Section 20, in combination with all other moneys required to be applied by the State for the support of school districts and community college districts for that fiscal year pursuant to Section 8, exceeds the sum of the total allocations to school districts and community college districts from General Fund proceeds of taxes appropriated pursuant to Article XIII B and allocated local proceeds of taxes in the prior fiscal year, plus any al-locations from the Public School System Stabilization Account in the pri-or fiscal year, less any transfers to the Public School System Stabilization Account pursuant to this section in the prior fiscal year and any revenues allocated pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 8.5, adjusted for the per-centage change in average daily attendance and adjusted for the higher of the change in the cost of living pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of Section 8 of Article XIII B or the cost of living adjustment applied to school district and community college district general purpose apportion-ments. (2) (A) Commencing with the 2016–17 fiscal year, and for each fiscal year thereafter, to the extent the amount calculated under this paragraph exceeds the amounts previously transferred by the Controller from the General Fund to the Public School System Stabilization Account for a pre-ceding fiscal year, any positive amount calculated pursuant to subpara-graph (C) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) of Section 20 for that fiscal year shall be transferred from the General Fund to the Public School Sys-tem Stabilization Account in the amount calculated under subparagraph (B), subject to any reduction or suspension of this transfer pursuant to any other provision of this section or paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of Sec-tion 22. (B) The Director of Finance shall calculate the amount by which the positive amount identifed in subparagraph (C) of paragraph (2) of subdi-vision (b) of Section 20, in combination with all other moneys required to be applied by the State for the support of school districts and community college districts for that fiscal year pursuant to Section 8, exceeds the sum of the total allocations to school districts and community college districts from General Fund proceeds of taxes appropriated pursuant to Article XIII B and allocated local proceeds of taxes in the prior fiscal year, plus any al-locations from the Public School System Stabilization Account in the pri-or fiscal year, less any transfers to the Public School System Stabilization Account pursuant to this section in the prior fiscal year and any revenues allocated pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 8.5, adjusted for the per-centage change in average daily attendance and adjusted for the higher of the change in the cost of living pursuant to the paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of Section 8 of Article XIII B or the cost of living adjustment applied to school district and community college district general purpose appor-tionments. (c) Commencing with the 2016–17 fiscal year, and for each fiscal year thereafter, if the amount calculated pursuant to subparagraph (C) of para-graph (2) of subdivision (b) of Section 20 for a fiscal year is less than the amounts previously transferred by the Controller from the General Fund to the Public School System Stabilization Account for that fiscal year, the amount of this difference shall be appropriated and allocated by the State from the Public School System Stabilization Account for the support of school districts and community college districts. (d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the amount transferred to the Public School System Stabilization Account pursuant to subdivision (b) for a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount by which the amount of state support calculated pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivi-sion (b) of Section 8 exceeds the amount of state support calculated pursu-ant to paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) of Section 8 for that fiscal year. If the amount of state support calculated pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdi-vision (b) of Section 8 does not exceed the amount of state support calcu-lated pursuant to paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) of Section 8 for a fiscal year, no amount shall be transferred to the Public School System Stabiliza-tion Account pursuant to subdivision (b) for that fiscal year. (e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no amount shall be transferred to the Public School System Stabilization Account pursuant to subdivision (b) for a fiscal year for which a maintenance factor is deter-mined pursuant to subdivision (d) of Section 8. (f) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no amount shall be transferred to the Public School System Stabilization Account pursuant to subdivision (b) until the maintenance factor determined pursuant to sub-divisions (d) and (e) of Section 8 for fiscal years prior to the 2014–15 fiscal year has been fully allocated. Transfers may be made beginning in the fs-cal year following the fiscal year in which it is determined, based on the Budget Act for that fiscal year, that this condition will be met. If a transfer is made for a fiscal year for which it is later determined that this condition has not been met, the amount of the transfer shall be appropriated and al-located from the Public School System Stabilization Account for the sup-port of school districts and community college districts. No transfer shall be made for a year for which it was determined, based on the Budget Act for that fiscal year, that this condition would not be met but was subse-quently determined to have been met in that year or a prior fiscal year. (g) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no amount shall be transferred to the Public School System Stabilization Account for any fiscal year for which any of the provisions of subdivision (b) of Section 8 are suspended pursuant to subdivision (h) of Section 8. (h) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, for any fiscal year, the amount of a transfer to the Public School System Stabilization Account pursuant to subdivision (b) shall not exceed an amount that would result in a balance in the account that is in excess of 10 percent of the total allocations to school districts and community college districts from Gen-eral Fund proceeds of taxes appropriated pursuant to Article XIII B and allocated local proceeds of taxes for that fiscal year pursuant to Section 8. For any fiscal year, General Fund proceeds of taxes that, but for this sub-division, would have been transferred to the Public School System Stabi-lization Account shall be applied by the State for the support of school districts and community colleges. (i) In any fiscal year in which the amount required to be applied by the State for the support of school districts and community college districts for that fiscal year pursuant to Section 8 is less than the total allocations to school districts and community college districts from General Fund pro-ceeds of taxes appropriated pursuant to Article XIII B and allocated local proceeds of taxes in the prior fiscal year, plus any allocations from the Public School System Stabilization Account in the prior fiscal year, less any transfers to the Public School System Stabilization Account in the prior fiscal year and any revenues allocated pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 8.5, adjusted for the percentage change in average daily atten-dance and adjusted for the higher of the change in the cost of living pursu-ant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of Section 8 of Article XIII B or the cost of living adjustment applied to school district and community college district general purpose apportionments, the amount of the defciency shall be appropriated and allocated by the State from the Public School System Stabilization Account for the support of school districts and community college districts. (j) Funds transferred to the Public School System Stabilization Account shall be deemed, for purposes of Section 8, to be moneys applied by the State for the support of school districts and community college districts in the fiscal year for which the transfer is made, and not in the fiscal year in which moneys are appropriated from the account. (k) Nothing in this section shall be construed to reduce the amount of the moneys required to be applied by the State for the support of school districts and community college districts pursuant to Sections 8 and 8.5. (l) The Controller may utilize funds in the Public School System Stabi-lization Account, that he or she determines to currently be unnecessary for the purposes of this section, to help manage General Fund daily cashfow needs. Any use of funds by the Controller pursuant to this subdivision shall not interfere with the purposes of the Public School System Stabili-zation Account. [New section adopted November 4, 2014.] [Budget Emergency] SEC. 22. (a) Upon the Governor’s proclamation declaring a budget emergency and identifying the conditions constituting the emergency, the Legislature may pass a bill that does any of the following: (1) Suspends or reduces by a specified dollar amount for one fiscal year the transfer of moneys from the General Fund to the Budget Stabilization Account required by Section 20. (2) (A) Returns funds that have been transferred to the Budget Stabili-zation Account pursuant to Section 20 to the General Fund for appropria-tion to address the budget emergency. (B) Not more than 50 percent of the balance in the Budget Stabilization Account may be returned to the General Fund for appropriation pursuant to subparagraph (A) in any fiscal year, unless funds in the Budget Stabili-zation Account have been returned to the General Fund for appropriation in the immediately preceding fiscal year. (3) Suspends or reduces by a specified dollar amount for one fiscal year the transfer of moneys from the General Fund to the Public School System Stabilization Account required by Section 21. (4) Appropriates funds transferred to the Public School System Stabili-zation Account pursuant to Section 21 and allocates those funds for the support of school districts and community college districts. (b) For purposes of this section, “budget emergency” means any of the following: (1) An emergency declared by the Governor, within the meaning of paragraph (2) of subdivision (c) of Section 3 of Article XIII B. (2) (A) A determination by the Governor that estimated resources are inadequate to fund General Fund expenditures for the current or ensuing fiscal year, after setting aside funds for the reserve for liquidation of en-cumbrances, at a level equal to the highest amount of total General Fund expenditures estimated at the time of enactment of any of the three most recent Budget Acts, adjusted for both of the following: (i) The annual percentage change in the cost of living for the State, as measured by the California Consumer Price Index. (ii) The annual percentage growth in the civilian population of the State pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 7901 of the Government Code. (B) The maximum amount that may be withdrawn for a budget emer-gency determined under this paragraph shall not exceed either an amount that would result in a total General Fund expenditure level for a fiscal year that is greater than the highest amount of total General Fund expenditures estimated at the time of enactment of any of the three most recent Budget Acts, as calculated pursuant to subparagraph (A), or any limit imposed by subparagraph (B) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (a). [New section adopt-ed November 4, 2014.] [Tobacco Tax Revenues] SEC. 23. The tax imposed by the California Healthcare, Research and Prevention Tobacco Tax Act of 2016 and the revenue derived therefrom, including investment interest, shall not be considered General Fund reve-nues for purposes of Section 8 and its implementing statutes, and shall not be considered “General Fund revenues,” “state revenues,” or “General Fund proceeds of taxes” for purposes of subdivisions (a) and (b) of Section 8 and its implementing statutes. [New Section adopted November 8, 2016. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE XVII. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] ARTICLE XVIII. [Repealed November 3, 1970. See Article XVIII, below.] ARTICLE XVIII * AMENDING AND REVISING THE CONSTITUTION SECTION 1. [Repealed November 3, 1970. See Section 1, below.] [By Legislature] SECTION 1. The Legislature by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership of each house concurring, may propose an amendment or revision of the Constitution and in the same manner may amend or withdraw its proposal. Each amendment shall be so prepared and * New Article XVIII adopted November 3, 1970. submitted that it can be voted on separately. [New section adopted Novem-ber 3, 1970.] SEC. 2. [Repealed November 3, 1970. See Section 2, below.] [Constitutional Convention] SEC. 2. The Legislature by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership of each house concurring, may submit at a gen-eral election the question whether to call a convention to revise the Con-stitution. If the majority vote yes on that question, within 6 months the Legislature shall provide for the convention. Delegates to a constitutional convention shall be voters elected from districts as nearly equal in popula-tion as may be practicable. [New section adopted November 3, 1970.] [Initiatives] SEC. 3. The electors may amend the Constitution by initiative. [New section adopted November 3, 1970.] [Effective Date—conflict] SEC. 4. A proposed amendment or revision shall be submitted to the electors and, if approved by a majority of votes cast thereon, takes effect on the ffth day after the Secretary of State fles the statement of the vote for the election at which the measure is voted on, but the measure may provide that it becomes operative after its effective date. If provisions of two or more measures approved at the same election conflict, the provi-sions of the measure receiving the highest number of affrmative votes shall prevail. [As amended June 5, 2018.] ARTICLE XIX * MOTOR VEHICLE REVENUES [Highway Users Tax Account Revenues] SECTION 1. The Legislature shall not borrow revenue from the High-way Users Tax Account, or its successor, and shall not use these revenues for purposes, or in ways, other than those specifcally permitted by this article. [New section adopted November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Use of Fuel Taxes] SEC 2. Revenues from taxes imposed by the State on motor vehicle fuels for use in motor vehicles upon public streets and highways, over and above the costs of collection and any refunds authorized by law, shall be deposited into the Highway Users Tax Account (Section 2100 of the * Former Article XXVI, as renumbered June 8, 1976. Streets and Highways Code) or its successor, which is hereby declared to be a trust fund, and shall be allocated monthly in accordance with Section 4, and shall be used solely for the following purposes: (a) The research, planning, construction, improvement, maintenance, and operation of public streets and highways (and their related public fa-cilities for nonmotorized traffc), including the mitigation of their environ-mental effects, the payment for property taken or damaged for such pur-poses, and the administrative costs necessarily incurred in the foregoing purposes. (b) The research, planning, construction, and improvement of exclusive public mass transit guideways (and their related fxed facilities), including the mitigation of their environmental effects, the payment for property taken or damaged for such purposes, the administrative costs necessarily incurred in the foregoing purposes, and the maintenance of the structures and the immediate right-of-way for the public mass transit guideways, but excluding the maintenance and operating costs for mass transit power sys-tems and mass transit passenger facilities, vehicles, equipment, and ser-vices. [Former Section 1, as renumbered November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Use of Motor Vehicle Fees and Taxes] SEC. 3. Revenues from fees and taxes imposed by the State upon ve-hicles or their use or operation, over and above the costs of collection and any refunds authorized by law, shall be used for the following purposes: (a) The state administration and enforcement of laws regulating the use, operation, or registration of vehicles used upon the public streets and high-ways of this State, including the enforcement of traffc and vehicle laws by state agencies and the mitigation of the environmental effects of motor ve-hicle operation due to air and sound emissions. (b) The purposes specified in Section 2 of this article. [Former Section 2, as renumbered November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Appropriations by the Legislature—Regulation of Expenditures, Etc.] SEC. 4. (a) Except as provided in subdivision (b), the statutory formu-las in effect on June 30, 2009, which allocate the revenues described in Section 2 to cities, counties, and areas of the State shall remain in effect. (b) The Legislature shall not modify the statutory allocations in effect on June 30, 2009, unless and until both of the following have occurred: (1) The Legislature determines in accordance with this subdivision that another basis for an equitable, geographical, and jurisdictional distribution exists. Any future statutory revisions shall (A) provide for the allocation of these revenues, together with other similar revenues, in a manner which gives equal consideration to the transportation needs of all areas of the State and all segments of the population; and (B) be consistent with the orderly achievement of the adopted local, regional, and statewide goals for ground transportation in local general plans, regional transportation plans, and the California Transportation Plan; (2) The process described in subdivision (c) has been completed. (c) The Legislature shall not modify the statutory allocation pursuant to subdivision (b) until all of the following have occurred: (1) The California Transportation Commission has held no less than four public hearings in different parts of the State to receive public input about the local and regional goals for ground transportation in that part of the State; (2) The California Transportation Commission has published a report describing the input received at the public hearings and how the modifca-tion to the statutory allocation is consistent with the orderly achievement of local, regional, and statewide goals for ground transportation in local general plans, regional transportation plans, and the California Transporta-tion Plan; and (3) Ninety days have passed since the publication of the report by the California Transportation Commission. (d) A statute enacted by the Legislature modifying the statutory alloca-tions must be by a bill passed in each house of the Legislature by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring, pro-vided that the bill does not contain any other unrelated provision. (e) The revenues allocated by statute to cities, counties, and areas of the State pursuant to this article may be used solely by the entity to which they are allocated, and solely for the purposes described in Sections 2, 5, or 6 of this article. (f) The Legislature may not take any action which permanently or tem-porarily does any of the following: (1) changes the status of the Highway Users Tax Account as a trust fund; (2) borrows, diverts, or appropriates these revenues for purposes other than those described in subdivision (e); or (3) delays, defers, suspends, or otherwise interrupts the payment, allo-cation, distribution, disbursal, or transfer of revenues from taxes described in Section 2 to cities, counties, and areas of the State pursuant to the pro-cedures in effect on June 30, 2009. [Former Section 3, as renumbered No-vember 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Authorization and Approval for Expenditures] SEC. 5. Revenues allocated pursuant to Section 4 may not be expended for the purposes specified in subdivision (b) of Section 2, except for re-search and planning, until such use is approved by a majority of the votes cast on the proposition authorizing such use of such revenues in an elec-tion held throughout the county or counties, or a specified area of a coun-ty or counties, within which the revenues are to be expended. The Legis-lature may authorize the revenues approved for allocation or expenditure under this section to be pledged or used for the payment of principal and interest on voter-approved bonds issued for the purposes specified in sub-division (b) of Section 2. [Former Section 4, as renumbered November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Expenditures for Payment of Bonds] SEC. 6. (a) Up to 25 percent of the revenues allocated to the State pur-suant to Section 4 for the purposes specified in subdivision (a) of Section 2 of this article may be pledged or used by the State, upon approval by the voters and appropriation by the Legislature, for the payment of principal and interest on voter-approved bonds for such purposes issued by the State on and after November 2, 2010. (b) Up to 25 percent of the revenues allocated to any city or county pur-suant to Section 4 for the purposes specified in subdivision (a) of Section 2 of this article may be pledged or used only by any city or county for the payment of principal and interest on voter-approved bonds issued by that city or county for such purposes. [Former Section 5, as renumbered November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] SEC. 6. [Repealed November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Replacement Revenue] SEC. 7. If the Legislature reduces or repeals the taxes described in Sec-tion 2 and adopts an alternative source of revenue to replace the moneys derived from those taxes, the replacement revenue shall be deposited into the Highway Users Tax Account, dedicated to the purposes listed in Sec-tion 2, and allocated to cities, counties, and areas of the State pursuant to Section 4. All other provisions of this article shall apply to any revenues adopted by the Legislature to replace the moneys derived from the taxes described in Section 2. [New section adopted November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Scope of Article] SEC. 8. This article shall not affect or apply to fees or taxes imposed pursuant to the Sales and Use Tax Law or the Vehicle License Fee Law, and all amendments and additions now or hereafter made to such statutes. [Former Section 7, as renumbered November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Use of Excess Lands for Parks and Recreation] SEC. 9. Notwithstanding Sections 2 and 3 of this article, any real prop-erty acquired by the expenditure of the designated tax revenues by an en-tity other than the State for the purposes authorized in those sections, but no longer required for such purposes, may be used for local public park and recreational purposes. [Former Section 8, as renumbered November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Transfer of Surplus State Property Located in Coastal Zone] SEC. 10. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, the Legislature, by statute, with respect to surplus state property acquired by the expenditure of tax revenues designated in Sections 2 and 3 and located in the coastal zone, may authorize the transfer of such property, for a con-sideration at least equal to the acquisition cost paid by the State to acquire the property, to the Department of Parks and Recreation for state park pur-poses, or to the Department of Fish and Game for the protection and pres-ervation of fish and wildlife habitat, or to the Wildlife Conservation Board for purposes of the Wildlife Conservation Law of 1947, or to the State Coastal Conservancy for the preservation of agricultural lands. As used in this section, “coastal zone” means “coastal zone” as defined by Section 30103 of the Public Resources Code as such zone is described on January 1, 1977. [Former Section 9, as renumbered November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE XIX A * LOANS FROM THE PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION ACCOUNT OR LOCAL TRANSPORTATION FUNDS [Loans to State General Fund—Use of Funds] SECTION 1. (a) The Legislature shall not borrow revenues from the Public Transportation Account, or any successor account, and shall not use these revenues for purposes, or in ways, other than those specifcally per-mitted by this article. (b) The Public Transportation Account in the State Transportation Fund, or any successor account, is a trust fund. The Legislature may not change the status of the Public Transportation Account as a trust fund. Funds in the Public Transportation Account may not be loaned or otherwise trans-ferred to the General Fund or any other fund or account in the State Trea-sury. (c) All revenues specified in paragraphs (1) through (3), inclusive, of subdivision (a) of Section 7102 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as that section read on June 1, 2001, shall be deposited no less than quarterly into the Public Transportation Account (Section 99310 of the Public Utilities Code), or its successor. The Legislature may not take any action which temporarily or permanently diverts or appropriates these revenues for pur-poses other than those described in subdivision (d), or delays, defers, sus-pends, or otherwise interrupts the quarterly deposit of these funds into the Public Transportation Account. (d) Funds in the Public Transportation Account may only be used for transportation planning and mass transportation purposes. The revenues * New Article XIX A adopted November 3, 1998. described in subdivision (c) are hereby continuously appropriated to the Controller without regard to fiscal years for allocation as follows: (1) Fifty percent pursuant to subdivisions (a) through (f), inclusive, of Section 99315 of the Public Utilities Code, as that section read on July 30, 2009. (2) Twenty-fve percent pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 99312 of the Public Utilities Code, as that section read on July 30, 2009. (3) Twenty-fve percent pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 99312 of the Public Utilities Code, as that section read on July 30, 2009. (e) For purposes of paragraph (I) of subdivision (d), “transportation planning” means only the purposes described in subdivisions (c) through (f), inclusive, of Section 99315 of the Public Utilities Code, as that section read on July 30, 2009. (f) For purposes of this article, “mass transportation,” “public transit,” and “mass transit” have the same meaning as “public transportation.” “Public transportation” means: (1) (A) Surface transportation service provided to the general public, complementary paratransit service provided to persons with disabilities as required by 42 U.S.C. 12143, or similar transportation provided to people with disabilities or the elderly; (B) operated by bus, rail, ferry, or other conveyance on a fxed route, demand response, or otherwise regularly available basis; (C) generally for which a fare is charged; and (D) provid-ed by any transit district, included transit district, municipal operator, in-cluded municipal operator, eligible municipal operator, or transit develop-ment board, as those terms were defined in Article 1 of Chapter 4 of Part 11 of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code on January 1, 2009, a joint powers authority formed to provide mass transportation services, an agen-cy described in subdivision (f) of Section 15975 of the Government Code, as that section read on January 1, 2009, any recipient of funds under Sec-tions 99260, 99260.7, 99275, or subdivision (c) of Section 99400 of the Public Utilities Code, as those sections read on January 1, 2009, or a con-solidated agency as defined in Section 132353.1 of the Public Utilities Code, as that section read on January 1, 2009. (2) Surface transportation service provided by the Department of Trans-portation pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 99315 of the Public Utili-ties Code, as that section read on July 30, 2009. (3) Public transit capital improvement projects, including those identi-fed in subdivision (b) of Section 99315 of the Public Utilities Code, as that section read on July 30, 2009. (g) All revenues specified in Sections 6051.8 and 6201.8 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as those sections read on January 1, 2018, shall be de-posited no less than quarterly into the Public Transportation Account, or its successor. Except as provided in Sections 16310 and 16381 of the Gov-ernment Code, as those sections read on January 1, 2018, the Legislature may not take any action that temporarily or permanently diverts or appro-priates these revenues for purposes other than those described in subdivi-sion (d), or delays, defers, suspends, or otherwise interrupts the quarterly deposit of these revenues into the Public Transportation Account. [As amended June 5, 2018.] [“Local Transportation Fund”] SEC. 2. (a) As used in this section, a “local transportation fund” is a fund created under Section 29530 of the Government Code, or any succes-sor to that statute. (b) All local transportation funds are hereby designated trust funds. The Legislature may not change the status of local transportation funds as trust funds. (c) A local transportation fund that has been created pursuant to law may not be abolished. (d) Money in a local transportation fund shall be allocated only by the local government that created the fund, and only for the purposes autho-rized under Article 11 (commencing with Section 29530) of Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the Government Code and Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 99200) of Part 11 of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code, as those provisions existed on October 1, 1997. Neither the county nor the Legislature may authorize the expenditure of money in a local transporta-tion fund for purposes other than those specified in this subdivision. (e) This section constitutes the sole method of allocating, distributing, and using the revenues in a local transportation fund. The purposes de-scribed in subdivision (d) are the sole purposes for which the revenues in a local transportation fund may be used. The Legislature may not enact a statute or take any other action which, permanently or temporarily, does any of the following: (1) Transfers, diverts, or appropriates the revenues in a local transporta-tion fund for any other purpose than those described in subdivision (d); (2) Authorizes the expenditures of the revenue in a local transportation fund for any other purpose than those described in subdivision (d); (3) Borrows or loans the revenues in a local transportation fund, regard-less of whether these revenues remain in the Retail Sales Tax Fund in the State Treasury or are transferred to another fund or account. (f) The percentage of the tax imposed pursuant to Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code allocated to local transportation funds shall not be reduced below the percentage that was transmitted to such funds during the 2008 calendar year. Revenues allocated to local transportation funds shall be transmitted in accordance with Section 7204 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and deposited into local transportation funds in accor-dance with Section 29530 of the Government Code, as those sections read on June 30, 2009. [As amended November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE XIX B * MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL SALES TAX REVENUES AND TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT FUNDING [Use of Funds] SECTION 1. The Legislature shall not borrow revenues from the Trans-portation Investment Fund, or its successor, and shall not use these reve-nues for purposes, or in ways, other than those specifcally permitted by this article. [New section added November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Allocation of Funds] SEC. 2. For the 2003–04 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter, all revenues that are collected during the fiscal year from taxes under the Sales and Use Tax Law (Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Divi-sion 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code), or any successor to that law, upon the sale, storage, use, or other consumption in this State of motor vehicle fuel, as defined for purposes of the Motor Vehicle Fuel License Tax Law (Part 2 (commencing with Section 7301) of Division 2 of the Reve-nue and Taxation Code), shall be deposited into the Transportation Invest-ment Fund or its successor, which is hereby created in the State Treasury and which is hereby declared to be a trust fund. The Legislature may not change the status of the Transportation Investment Fund as a trust fund. (b) (1) For the 2003–04 to 2007–08 fiscal years, inclusive, moneys in the Transportation Investment Fund shall be allocated, upon appropriation by the Legislature, in accordance with Section 7104 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as that section read on March 6, 2002. (2) For the 2008–09 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter, moneys in the Transportation Investment Fund shall be allocated solely for the fol-lowing purposes: (A) Public transit and mass transportation. Moneys appropriated for public transit and mass transportation shall be allocated as follows: (i) Twenty-fve percent pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 99312 of the Public Utilities Code, as that section read on July 30, 2009; (ii) Twenty-fve percent pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 99312 of the Public Utilities Code, as that section read on July 30, 2009; and (iii) Fifty percent for the purposes of subdivisions (a) and (b) of Section 99315 of the Public Utilities Code, as that section read on July 30, 2009. (B) Transportation capital improvement projects, subject to the laws governing the State Transportation Improvement Program, or any succes-sor to that program. (C) Street and highway maintenance, rehabilitation, reconstruction, or storm damage repair conducted by cities, including a city and county. * New Article XIX B adopted November 5, 2002. (D) Street and highway maintenance, rehabilitation, reconstruction, or storm damage repair conducted by counties, including a city and county. (c) For the 2008–09 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter, moneys in the Transportation Investment Fund are hereby continuously appropri-ated to the Controller without regard to fiscal years, which shall be allo-cated as follows: (A) Twenty percent of the moneys for the purposes set forth in subpara-graph (A) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b). (B) Forty percent of the moneys for the purposes set forth in subpara-graph (B) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b). (C) Twenty percent of the moneys for the purposes set forth in subpara-graph (C) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b). (D) Twenty percent of the moneys for the purposes set forth in subpara-graph (D) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b). (d) The Legislature may not enact a statute that modifes the percentage shares set forth in subdivision (c) until all of the following have occurred: (1) The California Transportation Commission has held no less than four public hearings in different parts of the State to receive public input about the need for public transit, mass transportation, transportation capi-tal improvement projects, and street and highway maintenance; (2) The California Transportation Commission has published a report describing the input received at the public hearings and how the modifca-tion to the statutory allocation is consistent with the orderly achievement of local, regional and statewide goals for public transit, mass transporta-tion, transportation capital improvements, and street and highway mainte-nance in a manner that is consistent with local general plans, regional transportation plans, and the California Transportation Plan; (3) Ninety days have passed since the publication of the report by the California Transportation Commission. (4) The statute enacted by the Legislature pursuant to this subdivision must be by a bill passed in each house of the Legislature by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring, provided that the bill does not contain any other unrelated provision and that the revenues described in subdivision (a) are expended solely for the purposes set forth in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b). (e) (1) An amount equivalent to the total amount of revenues that were not transferred from the General Fund of the State to the Transportation Investment Fund, as of July 1, 2007, because of a suspension of transfer of revenues pursuant to this section as it read on January 1, 2006, but exclud-ing the amount to be paid to the Transportation Deferred Investment Fund pursuant to Section 63048.65 of the Government Code, shall be trans-ferred from the General Fund to the Transportation Investment Fund no later than June 30, 2016. Until this total amount has been transferred, the amount of transfer payments to be made in each fiscal year shall not be less than one-tenth of the total amount required to be transferred by June 30, 2016. The transferred revenues shall be allocated solely for the pur-poses set forth in this section as if they had been received in the absence of a suspension of transfer of revenues. (2) The Legislature may provide by statute for the issuance of bonds by the state or local agencies, as applicable, that are secured by the minimum transfer payments required by paragraph (1). Proceeds from the sale of those bonds shall be allocated solely for the purposes set forth in this sec-tion as if they were revenues subject to allocation pursuant to paragraph (2) of subdivision (b). (f) This section constitutes the sole method of allocating, distributing, and using the revenues described in subdivision (a). The purposes de-scribed in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) are the sole purposes for which the revenues described in subdivision (a) may be used. The Legislature may not enact a statute or take any other action which, permanently or temporarily, does any of the following: (1) Transfers, diverts, or appropriates the revenues described in subdivi-sion (a) for any other purposes than those described in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b); (2) Authorizes the expenditures of the revenues described in subdivision (a)for any other purposes than those described in paragraph (2) of subdi-vision (b) or; (3) Borrows or loans the revenues described in subdivision (a), regard-less of whether these revenues remain in the Transportation Investment Fund or are transferred to another fund or account such as the Public Transportation Account, a trust fund in the State Transportation Fund. (g) For purposes of this article, “mass transportation,” “public transit” and “mass transit” have the same meanings as “public transportation.” “Public transportation” means: (1) (A) Surface transportation service provided to the general public, complementary paratransit service provided to persons with disabilities as required by 42 U.S.C. 12143, or similar transportation provided to people with disabilities or the elderly; (B) operated by bus, rail, ferry, or other conveyance on a fxed route, demand response, or otherwise regularly available basis; (C) generally for which a fare is charged; and (D) provid-ed by any transit district, included transit district, municipal operator, in-cluded municipal operator, eligible municipal operator, or transit develop-ment board, as those terms were defined in Article 1 of Chapter 4 of Part 11 of Division 10 of the Public Utilities Code on January 1, 2009, a joint powers authority formed to provide mass transportation services, an agen-cy described in subdivision (f) of Section 15975 of the Government Code, as that section read on January 1, 2009, any recipient of funds under Sec-tions 99260, 99260.7, 99275, or subdivision (c) of Section 99400 of the Public Utilities Code, as those sections read on January 1, 2009, or a con-solidated agency as defined in Section 132353.1 of the Public Utilities Code, as that section read on January 1, 2009. (2) Surface transportation service provided by the Department of Trans-portation pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 99315 of the Public Utili-ties Code, as that section read on July 30, 2009. (3) Public transit capital improvement projects, including those identi-fed in subdivision (b) of Section 99315 of the Public Utilities Code, as that section read on July 30, 2009. (h) If the Legislature reduces or repeals the taxes described in subdivi-sion (a) and adopts an alternative source of revenue to replace the moneys derived from those taxes, the replacement revenue shall be deposited into the Transportation Investment Fund, dedicated to the purposes listed in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b), and allocated pursuant to subdivision (c). All other provisions of this article shall apply to any revenues adopted by the Legislature to replace the moneys derived from the taxes described in subdivision (a). [Former Section 1, as renumbered November 2, 2010. Ini-tiative measure.] ARTICLE XIX C * ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS [Challenge to Invalidate an Action] SECTION 1. If any challenge to invalidate an action that violates Article XIX, XIX A, or XIX B is successful either by way of a fnal judgment, settlement, or resolution by administrative or legislative action, there is hereby continuously appropriated from the General Fund to the Controller, without regard to fiscal years, that amount of revenue necessary to restore the fund or account from which the revenues were unlawfully taken or di-verted to its fnancial status had the unlawful action not been taken. [New section adopted November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Challenge to Invalidate an Action] SEC. 2. If any challenge to invalidate an action that violates Section 24 or Section 25.5 of Article XIII is successful either by way of a fnal judg-ment, settlement, or resolution by administrative or legislative action, there is hereby continuously appropriated from the General Fund to the local government an amount of revenue equal to the amount of revenue unlawfully taken or diverted. [New section adopted November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Interest] SEC. 3. Interest calculated at the Pooled Money Investment Fund rate from the date or dates the revenues were unlawfully taken or diverted shall * New Article XIX C adopted November 2, 2010. Initiative measure. accrue to the amounts required to be restored pursuant to this section. Within 30 days from the date a challenge is successful, the Controller shall make the transfer required by the continuous appropriation and issue a no-tice to the parties that the transfer has been completed. [New section ad-opted November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Restraining Order or Preliminary Injunction] SEC. 4. If in any challenge brought pursuant to this section a restrain-ing order or preliminary injunction is issued, the plaintiffs or petitioners shall not be required to post a bond obligating the plaintiffs or petitioners to indemnify the government defendants or the State of California for any damage the restraining order or preliminary injunction may cause. [New section adopted November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE XIX D * VEHICLE LICENSE FEE REVENUES FOR TRANSPORTATION PURPOSES [Use of Funds] SECTION 1. (a) Notwithstanding Section 8 of Article XIX, revenues de-rived from vehicle fees imposed under the Vehicle License Fee Law pursu-ant to Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 11050) of Part 5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or its successor, over and above the costs of collection and any refunds authorized by law, shall be used solely for transportation purposes, as defined by Section 11050 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as that section read upon enactment of the Road Re-pair and Accountability Act of 2017. (b) The revenues described in subdivision (a) shall not be used for the payment of principal and interest on state transportation general obligation bonds that were authorized by the voters on or before November 8, 2016, nor shall those revenues be used for payment of principal and interest on state transportation general obligation bond acts approved by the voters after that date, unless the bond act expressly authorizes that use. (c) Except as provided in Sections 16310 and 16381 of the Government Code, as those sections read on January 1, 2018, the Legislature shall not borrow the revenues described in subdivision (a), and shall not use these revenues for purposes, or in ways, other than as authorized in subdivisions (a)or (b). [New section adopted June 5, 2018.] ARTICLE XX MISCELLANEOUS SUBJECTS [Sacramento County Consolidation With City or Cities] SECTION 1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6 of Article XI, the County of Sacramento and all or any of the cities within the County of * New Article XIX D adopted June 5, 2018. Sacramento may be consolidated as a charter city and county as provided by statute, with the approval of a majority of the electors of the county voting on the question of such consolidation and upon such other vote as the Legislature may prescribe in such statute. The charter City and County of Sacramento shall be a charter city and a charter county. Its charter city powers supersede conflicting charter county powers. [New section adopted June 4, 1974.] [Protection of Homesteads] SEC. 1.5. The Legislature shall protect, by law, from forced sale a certain portion of the homestead and other property of all heads of families. [New section adopted June 8, 1976.] [Leland Stanford Junior University—Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery] SEC. 2. Except for tax exemptions provided in Article XIII, the rights, powers, privileges, and confrmations conferred by Sections 10 † and 15 † of Article IX in effect on January 1, 1973, relating to Stanford University and the Huntington Library and Art Gallery, are continued in effect. [Former Section 6, as renumbered June 8, 1976.] [Oath of office] SEC. 3. Members of the Legislature, and all public officers and employees, executive, legislative, and judicial, except such inferior officers and employees as may be by law exempted, shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe the following oath or affrmation: “I, , do solemnly swear (or affrm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of California against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of California; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. “And I do further swear (or affrm) that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any party or organization, political or otherwise, that now advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States or of the State of California by force or violence or other unlawful means; that within the fve years immediately preceding the taking of this oath (or affrmation) I have not been a member of any party or organization, political or otherwise, that advocated the overthrow of the Government of the United † Sections 10 and 15 of Article IX repealed November 5, 1974. States or of the State of California by force or violence or other unlawful means except as follows: (If no affliations, write in the words “No Exceptions”) and that during such time as I hold the office of (name of office) I will not advocate nor become a member of any party or organization, political or otherwise, that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States or of the State of California by force or violence or other unlawful means.” And no other oath, declaration, or test, shall be required as a qualifcation for any public office or employment. “Public officer and employee” includes every officer and employee of the State, including the University of California, every county, city, city and county, district, and authority, including any department, division, bureau, board, commission, agency, or instrumentality of any of the foregoing. [As amended November 4, 1952.] SEC. 3.5. [Repealed November 3, 1970.] [Franchises] SEC. 4. The Legislature shall not pass any laws permitting the leasing or alienation of any franchise, so as to relieve the franchise or property held thereunder from the liabilities of the lessor or grantor, lessee, or grantee, contracted or incurred in the operation, use, or enjoyment of such franchise, or any of its privileges. [Former Section 7, as renumbered June 8, 1976.] SEC. 5. [Repealed June 8, 1976. See Section 5, below.] [Laws Concerning Corporations] SEC. 5. All laws now in force in this State concerning corporations and all laws that may be hereafter passed pursuant to this section may be altered from time to time or repealed. [Former Section 24, as renumbered June 8, 1976.] SEC. 6. [Renumbered Section 2 June 8, 1976. See Section 6, below.] [Reduction in Legislator’s Term of office—Retirement benefits, Etc.] SEC. 6. Any legislator whose term of office is reduced by operation of the amendment to subdivision (a) of Section 2 of Article IV adopted by the people in 1972 shall, notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, be entitled to retirement benefits and compensation as if the term of office had not been so reduced. [Former Section 25, as renumbered June 8, 1976.] [Constitutional officers—Number of Terms] SEC. 7. The limitations on the number of terms prescribed by Section 2 of Article IV, Sections 2 and 11 of Article V, Section 2 of Article IX, and Section 17 of Article XIII apply only to terms to which persons are elected or appointed on or after November 6, 1990, except that an incumbent Senator whose office is not on the ballot for the general election on that date may serve only one additional term. Those limitations shall not apply to any unexpired term to which a person is elected or appointed if the remainder of the term is less than half of the full term. [New section adopted November 6, 1990. Initiative measure.] SEC. 8. [Renumbered Section 21 of Article I and amended November 5, 1974.] SEC. 9. [Repealed November 3, 1970.] SEC. 10. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] SEC. 11. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] SEC. 12. [Repealed November 3, 1970.] SEC. 13. [Repealed November 3, 1970.] SEC. 14. [Repealed November 3, 1970.] SEC. 15. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] SEC. 16. [Repealed November 7, 1972.] SEC. 17. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] SEC. 17. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] SEC. 18. [Renumbered Section 8 of Article I and amended November 5, 1974.] SEC. 19. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] SEC. 20. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] SEC. 21. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] [Liquor Control] SEC. 22. The State of California, subject to the internal revenue laws of the United States, shall have the exclusive right and power to license and regulate the manufacture, sale, purchase, possession and transportation of alcoholic beverages within the State, and subject to the laws of the United States regulating commerce between foreign nations and among the states shall have the exclusive right and power to regulate the importation into and exportation from the State, of alcoholic beverages. In the exercise of these rights and powers, the Legislature shall not constitute the State or any agency thereof a manufacturer or seller of alcoholic beverages. [Licensed Premises—Types of Licenses] All alcoholic beverages may be bought, sold, served, consumed and oth-erwise disposed of in premises which shall be licensed as provided by the Legislature. In providing for the licensing of premises, the Legislature may provide for the issuance of, among other licenses, licenses for the fol-lowing types of premises where the alcoholic beverages specified in the licenses may be sold and served for consumption upon the premises: (a) For bona fde public eating places, as defined by the Legislature. (b) For public premises in which food shall not be sold or served as in a bona fde public eating place, but upon which premises the Legislature may permit the sale or service of food products incidental to the sale and service of alcoholic beverages. No person under the age of 21 years shall be permitted to enter and remain in any such premises without lawful busi-ness therein. (c) For public premises for the sale and service of beers alone. (d) Under such conditions as the Legislature may impose, for railroad dining or club cars, passenger ships, common carriers by air, and bona fde clubs after such clubs have been lawfully operated for not less than one year. [Service or Sale to Minors] The sale, furnishing, giving, or causing to be sold, furnished, or giving away of any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years is hereby prohibited, and no person shall sell, furnish, give, or cause to be sold, furnished, or given away any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years, and no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase any alcoholic beverage. [Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control] The Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control shall be the head of the De-partment of Alcoholic Beverage Control, shall be appointed by the Gover-nor subject to confrmation by a majority vote of all of the members elect-ed to the Senate, and shall serve at the pleasure of the Governor. The director may be removed from office by the Governor, and the Legislature shall have the power, by a majority vote of all members elected to each house, to remove the director from office for dereliction of duty or corrup-tion or incompetency. The director may appoint three persons who shall be exempt from civil service, in addition to the person he is authorized to ap-point by Section 4 of Article XXIV. [Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control—Powers—Duties] The Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control shall have the exclusive power, except as herein provided and in accordance with laws enacted by the Legislature, to license the manufacture, importation and sale of alco-holic beverages in this State, and to collect license fees or occupation tax-es on account thereof. The department shall have the power, in its discre-tion, to deny, suspend or revoke any specifc alcoholic beverages license if it shall determine for good cause that the granting or continuance of such license would be contrary to public welfare or morals, or that a person seeking or holding a license has violated any law prohibiting conduct in-volving moral turpitude. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensee of said department to manufacture, import or sell alcoholic bever-ages in this State. [Alcoholic Beverage Control Appeals Board] The Alcoholic Beverage Control Appeals Board shall consist of three members appointed by the Governor, subject to confrmation by a major-ity vote of all of the members elected to the Senate. Each member, at the time of his initial appointment, shall be a resident of a different county from the one in which either of the other members resides. The members of the board may be removed from office by the Governor, and the Legis-lature shall have the power, by a majority vote of all members elected to each house, to remove any member from office for dereliction of duty or corruption or incompetency. [Appeals—Reviews—Reversals] When any person aggrieved thereby appeals from a decision of the de-partment ordering any penalty assessment, issuing, denying, transferring, suspending or revoking any license for the manufacture, importation, or sale of alcoholic beverages, the board shall review the decision subject to such limitations as may be imposed by the Legislature. In such cases, the board shall not receive evidence in addition to that considered by the de-partment. Review by the board of a decision of the department shall be limited to the questions whether the department has proceeded without or in excess of its jurisdiction, whether the department has proceeded in the manner required by law, whether the decision is supported by the findings, and whether the findings are supported by substantial evidence in the light of the whole record. In appeals where the board finds that there is relevant evidence which, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, could not have been produced or which was improperly excluded at the hearing before the department it may enter an order remanding the matter to the department for reconsideration in the light of such evidence. In all other appeals the board shall enter an order either affrming or reversing the decision of the department. When the order reverses the decision of the department, the board may direct the reconsideration of the matter in the light of its order and may direct the department to take such further action as is specially enjoined upon it by law, but the order shall not limit or control in any way the discretion vested by law in the department. Orders of the board shall be subject to judicial review upon petition of the director or any party aggrieved by such order. [Removal of Director or Board Members] A concurrent resolution for the removal of either the director or any member of the board may be introduced in the Legislature only if fve Members of the Senate, or 10 Members of the Assembly, join as authors. [Licenses—Regulation—Fees] Until the Legislature shall otherwise provide, the privilege of keeping, buying, selling, serving, and otherwise disposing of alcoholic beverages in bona fde hotels, restaurants, cafes, cafeterias, railroad dining or club cars, passenger ships, and other public eating places, and in bona fde clubs after such clubs have been lawfully operated for not less than one year, and the privilege of keeping, buying, selling, serving, and otherwise disposing of beers on any premises open to the general public shall be licensed and regulated under the applicable provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, insofar as the same are not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, and excepting that the license fee to be charged bona fde hotels, restaurants, cafes, cafeterias, railroad dining or club cars, passenger ships, and other public eating places, and any bona fde clubs after such clubs have been lawfully operated for not less than one year, for the privilege of keeping, buying, selling, or otherwise disposing of alcoholic beverages, shall be the amounts prescribed as of the operative date hereof, subject to the power of the Legislature to change such fees. The State Board of Equalization shall assess and collect such excise taxes as are or may be imposed by the Legislature on account of the manufacture, importation and sale of alcoholic beverages in this State. The Legislature may authorize, subject to reasonable restrictions, the sale in retail stores of alcoholic beverages contained in the original packages, where such alcoholic beverages are not to be consumed on the premises where sold; and may provide for the issuance of all types of licenses necessary to carry on the activities referred to in the first paragraph of this section, including, but not limited to, licenses necessary for the manufacture, production, processing, importation, exportation, transportation, wholesaling, distribution, and sale of any and all kinds of alcoholic beverages. The Legislature shall provide for apportioning the amounts collected for license fees or occupation taxes under the provisions hereof between the State and the cities, counties and cities and counties of the State, in such manner as the Legislature may deem proper. All constitutional provisions and laws inconsistent with the provisions hereof are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section shall be self-executing, but nothing herein shall prohibit the Legislature from enacting laws implementing and not inconsistent with such provisions. This amendment shall become operative on January 1, 1957. [As amended November 6, 1956. Operative January 1, 1957.] [State Colleges—Speaker, Member of Governing Body] SEC. 23. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, the Speaker of the Assembly shall be an ex offcio member, having equal rights and duties with the nonlegislative members, of any state agency created by the Legislature in the feld of public higher education which is charged with the management, administration, and control of the State College System of California. [New section adopted November 3, 1970.] SEC. 24. [Renumbered Section 5 June 8, 1976.] SEC. 25. [Renumbered Section 6 June 8, 1976.] ARTICLE XXI * REDISTRICTING OF SENATE, ASSEMBLY, CONGRESSIONAL AND BOARD OF EQUALIZATION DISTRICTS [Heading as amended November 4, 2008. Initiative measure.] [Redistricting Following National Census] SECTION 1. In the year following the year in which the national census is taken under the direction of Congress at the beginning of each decade, the Citizens Redistricting Commission described in Section 2 shall adjust the boundary lines of the congressional, State Senatorial, Assembly, and Board of Equalization districts (also known as “redistricting”) in conformance with the standards and process set forth in Section 2. [As amended November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [The Citizens Redistricting Commission] SEC. 2. (a) The Citizens Redistricting Commission shall be created no later than December 31 in 2010, and in each year ending in the number zero thereafter. (b) The commission shall: (1) conduct an open and transparent process enabling full public consideration of and comment on the drawing of district lines; (2) draw district lines according to the redistricting criteria * New Article XXI adopted June 3, 1980. specified in this article; and (3) conduct themselves with integrity and fair-ness. (c) (1) The selection process is designed to produce a commission that is independent from legislative infuence and reasonably representative of this State’s diversity. (2) The commission shall consist of 14 members, as follows: fve who are registered with the largest political party in California based on regis-tration, fve who are registered with the second largest political party in California based on registration, and four who are not registered with ei-ther of the two largest political parties in California based on registration. (3) Each commission member shall be a voter who has been continu-ously registered in California with the same political party or unaffliated with a political party and who has not changed political party affliation for fve or more years immediately preceding the date of his or her ap-pointment. Each commission member shall have voted in two of the last three statewide general elections immediately preceding his or her appli-cation. (4) The term of office of each member of the commission expires upon the appointment of the first member of the succeeding commission. (5) Nine members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. Nine or more affrmative votes shall be required for any official action. The four fnal redistricting maps must be approved by at least nine affrmative votes which must include at least three votes of members registered from each of the two largest political parties in California based on registration and three votes from members who are not registered with either of these two political parties. (6) Each commission member shall apply this article in a manner that is impartial and that reinforces public confdence in the integrity of the redis-tricting process. A commission member shall be ineligible for a period of 10 years beginning from the date of appointment to hold elective public office at the federal, state, county, or city level in this State. A member of the commission shall be ineligible for a period of fve years beginning from the date of appointment to hold appointive federal, state, or local public office, to serve as paid staff for, or as a paid consultant to, the Board of Equalization, the Congress, the Legislature, or any individual legislator, or to register as a federal, state or local lobbyist in this State. (d) The commission shall establish single-member districts for the Sen-ate, Assembly, Congress, and State Board of Equalization pursuant to a mapping process using the following criteria as set forth in the following order of priority: (1) Districts shall comply with the United States Constitution. Congres-sional districts shall achieve population equality as nearly as is practicable, and Senatorial, Assembly, and State Board of Equalization districts shall have reasonably equal population with other districts for the same office, except where deviation is required to comply with the federal Voting Rights Act or allowable by law. (2) Districts shall comply with the federal Voting Rights Act (42 U.S.C. Sec. 1971 and following). (3) Districts shall be geographically contiguous. (4) The geographic integrity of any city, county, city and county, local neighborhood, or local community of interest shall be respected in a man-ner that minimizes their division to the extent possible without violating the requirements of any of the preceding subdivisions. A community of interest is a contiguous population which shares common social and eco-nomic interests that should be included within a single district for purpos-es of its effective and fair representation. Examples of such shared inter-ests are those common to an urban area, a rural area, an industrial area, or an agricultural area, and those common to areas in which the people share similar living standards, use the same transportation facilities, have similar work opportunities, or have access to the same media of communication relevant to the election process. Communities of interest shall not include relationships with political parties, incumbents, or political candidates. (5) To the extent practicable, and where this does not conflict with the criteria above, districts shall be drawn to encourage geographical com-pactness such that nearby areas of population are not bypassed for more distant population. (6) To the extent practicable, and where this does not conflict with the criteria above, each Senate district shall be comprised of two whole, com-plete, and adjacent Assembly districts, and each Board of Equalization district shall be comprised of 10 whole, complete, and adjacent Senate districts. (e) The place of residence of any incumbent or political candidate shall not be considered in the creation of a map. Districts shall not be drawn for the purpose of favoring or discriminating against an incumbent, political candidate, or political party. (f) Districts for the Congress, Senate, Assembly, and State Board of Equalization shall be numbered consecutively commencing at the northern boundary of the State and ending at the southern boundary. (g) By August 15 in 2011, and in each year ending in the number one thereafter, the commission shall approve four fnal maps that separately set forth the district boundary lines for the congressional, Senatorial, Assem-bly, and State Board of Equalization districts. Upon approval, the commis-sion shall certify the four fnal maps to the Secretary of State. (h) The commission shall issue, with each of the four fnal maps, a re-port that explains the basis on which the commission made its decisions in achieving compliance with the criteria listed in subdivision (d) and shall include definitions of the terms and standards used in drawing each fnal map. (i) Each certified fnal map shall be subject to referendum in the same manner that a statute is subject to referendum pursuant to Section 9 of Ar-ticle II. The date of certifcation of a fnal map to the Secretary of State shall be deemed the enactment date for purposes of Section 9 of Article II. (j) If the commission does not approve a fnal map by at least the requi-site votes or if voters disapprove a certified fnal map in a referendum, the Secretary of State shall immediately petition the California Supreme Court for an order directing the appointment of special masters to adjust the boundary lines of that map in accordance with the redistricting criteria and requirements set forth in subdivisions (d), (e), and (f). Upon its approval of the masters’ map, the court shall certify the resulting map to the Secre-tary of State, which map shall constitute the certified fnal map for the sub-ject type of district. [As amended November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] [Defense of certified Final Map] SEC. 3. (a) The commission has the sole legal standing to defend any action regarding a certified fnal map, and shall inform the Legislature if it determines that funds or other resources provided for the operation of the commission are not adequate. The Legislature shall provide adequate funding to defend any action regarding a certified map. The commission has sole authority to determine whether the Attorney General or other legal counsel retained by the commission shall assist in the defense of a certified fnal map. (b) (1) The California Supreme Court has original and exclusive juris-diction in all proceedings in which a certified fnal map is challenged or is claimed not to have taken timely effect. (2) Any registered voter in this state may fle a petition for a writ of mandate or writ of prohibition, within 45 days after the commission has certified a fnal map to the Secretary of State, to bar the Secretary of State from implementing the plan on the grounds that the fled plan violates this Constitution, the United States Constitution, or any federal or state statute. Any registered voter in this state may also fle a petition for a writ of man-date or writ of prohibition to seek relief where a certified fnal map is sub-ject to a referendum measure that is likely to qualify and stay the timely implementation of the map. (3) The California Supreme Court shall give priority to ruling on a peti-tion for a writ of mandate or a writ of prohibition fled pursuant to para-graph (2). If the court determines that a fnal certified map violates this Constitution, the United States Constitution, or any federal or state statute, the court shall fashion the relief that it deems appropriate, including, but not limited to, the relief set forth in subdivision (j) of Section 2. [As amend-ed November 2, 2010. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE XXII * ARCHITECTURAL AND ENGINEERING SERVICES [Authority of Government to Contract for Architectural and Engineering Services] SECTION 1. The State of California and all other governmental entities, including, but not limited to, cities, counties, cities and counties, school districts and other special districts, local and regional agencies and joint power agencies, shall be allowed to contract with qualified private entities for architectural and engineering services for all public works of improve-ment. The choice and authority to contract shall extend to all phases of project development including permitting and environmental studies, rights-of-way services, design phase services and construction phase ser-vices. The choice and authority shall exist without regard to funding sourc-es whether federal, state, regional, local or private, whether or not the proj-ect is programmed by a state, regional or local governmental entity, and whether or not the completed project is a part of any state owned or state operated system or facility. [New section adopted November 7, 2000. Ini-tiative measure.] [Construction of Article VII] SEC. 2. Nothing contained in Article VII of this Constitution shall be construed to limit, restrict or prohibit the State or any other governmental entities, including, but not limited to, cities, counties, cities and counties, school districts and other special districts, local and regional agencies and joint power agencies, from contracting with private entities for the perfor-mance of architectural and engineering services. [New section adopted November 7, 2000. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE XXIII. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] ARTICLE XXIV. [Repealed June 8, 1976.] ARTICLE XXV. [Repealed November 8, 1949. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE XXVI. [Renumbered Article XIX June 8, 1976.] ARTICLE XXVII. [Repealed November 3, 1970.] ARTICLE XXVIII. [Repealed November 5, 1974.] ARTICLE XXIX to XXXIII. [No articles have been adopted.] * New Article XXII adopted November 7, 2000. Initiative measure. ARTICLE XXXIV * PUBLIC HOUSING PROJECT LAW [Approval of Low Rent Housing Projects by Electors] SECTION 1. No low rent housing project shall hereafter be developed, constructed, or acquired in any manner by any state public body until, a majority of the qualified electors of the city, town or county, as the case may be, in which it is proposed to develop, construct, or acquire the same, voting upon such issue, approve such project by voting in favor thereof at an election to be held for that purpose, or at any general or special election. [“Low Rent Housing Project”] For the purposes of this article the term “low rent housing project” shall mean any development composed of urban or rural dwellings, apartments or other living accommodations for persons of low income, fnanced in whole or in part by the Federal Government or a state public body or to which the Federal Government or a state public body extends assistance by supplying all or part of the labor, by guaranteeing the payment of liens, or otherwise. For the purposes of this Article only there shall be excluded from the term “low rent housing project” any such project where there shall be in existence on the effective date hereof, a contract for fnancial assistance between any state public body and the Federal Government in respect to such project. [“Persons of Low Income”] For the purposes of this Article only “persons of low income” shall mean persons or families who lack the amount of income which is necessary (as determined by the state public body developing, constructing, or acquiring the housing project) to enable them, without fnancial assistance, to live in decent, safe and sanitary dwellings, without overcrowding. [“State Public Body”] For the purposes of this Article the term “state public body” shall mean this State, or any city, city and county, county, district, authority, agency, or any other subdivision or public body of this State. [“Federal Government”] For the purposes of this Article the term “Federal Government” shall mean the United States of America, or any agency or instrumentality, cor-porate or otherwise, of the United States of America. [New section adopt-ed November 7, 1950. Initiative measure.] * New Article XXXIV adopted November 7, 1950. Initiative measure. [Self-executing Provisions] SEC. 2. The provisions of this Article shall be self-executing but legis-lation not in conflict herewith may be enacted to facilitate its operation. [New section adopted November 7, 1950. Initiative measure.] [Constitutionality of Article] SEC. 3. If any portion, section or clause of this Article, or the applica-tion thereof to any person or circumstance, shall for any reason be declared unconstitutional or held invalid, the remainder of this Article, or the appli-cation of such portion, section or clause to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. [New section adopted November 7, 1950. Initiative measure.] [Scope of Article] SEC. 4. The provisions of this Article shall supersede all provisions of this Constitution and laws enacted thereunder in conflict therewith. [New section adopted November 7, 1950. Initiative measure.] ARTICLE XXXV * MEDICAL RESEARCH [California Institute for Regenerative Medicine] SECTION 1. There is hereby established the California Institute for Re-generative Medicine. [New section adopted November 2, 2004. Initiative measure.] [California Institute for Regenerative Medicine—Purposes] SEC. 2. The institute shall have the following purposes: (a) To make grants and loans for stem cell research, for research facili-ties, and for other vital research opportunities to realize therapies, proto-cols, and/or medical procedures that will result in, as speedily as possible, the cure for, and/or substantial mitigation of, major diseases, injuries, and orphan diseases. (b) To support all stages of the process of developing cures, from labo-ratory research through successful clinical trials. (c) To establish the appropriate regulatory standards and oversight bod-ies for research and facilities development. [New section adopted Novem-ber 2, 2004. Initiative measure.] * New Article XXXV adopted November 2, 2004. Initiative measure. [California Institute for Regenerative Medicine—Use of Funds for Cloning Research] SEC. 3. No funds authorized for, or made available to, the institute shall be used for research involving human reproductive cloning. [New section adopted November 2, 2004. Initiative measure.] [California Institute for Regenerative Medicine—Funds] SEC. 4. Funds authorized for, or made available to, the institute shall be continuously appropriated without regard to fiscal year, be available and used only for the purposes provided in this article, and shall not be subject to appropriation or transfer by the Legislature or the Governor for any other purpose. [New section adopted November 2, 2004. Initiative measure.] [Right to Conduct Stem Cell Research] SEC. 5. There is hereby established a right to conduct stem cell research which includes research involving adult stem cells, cord blood stem cells, pluripotent stem cells, and/or progenitor cells. Pluripotent stem cells are cells that are capable of self-renewal, and have broad potential to differentiate into multiple adult cell types. Pluripotent stem cells may be derived from somatic cell nuclear transfer or from surplus products of in vitro fertilization treatments when such products are donated under appropriate informed consent procedures. Progenitor cells are multipotent or precursor cells that are partially differentiated, but retain the ability to divide and give rise to differentiated cells. [New section adopted November 2, 2004. Initiative measure.] [California Institute for Regenerative Medicine—Utilization of Bonds] SEC. 6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution or any law, the institute, which is established in state government, may utilize state issued tax-exempt and taxable bonds to fund its operations, medical and scientifc research, including therapy development through clinical trials, and facilities. [New section adopted November 2, 2004. Initiative measure.] [California Institute for Regenerative Medicine—Civil Service Exemption] SEC. 7. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, including Article VII, or any law, the institute and its employees are exempt from civil service. [New section adopted November 2, 2004. Initiative measure.] Index Constitution of California INDEX TO CALIFORNIA CONSTITUTIONAyArticle SectionACADEMY OF SCIENCES, CALIFORNIAtaxation, exemption fromXIII 4(c)ACCOUNTSgeneral obligation bond proceeds fundXVI 1.5ACTIONS AND PROCEEDINGS. See also COURTS; CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.English language as official language of California, enforcement ofIII 6judges, proceedings againstVI 18(b), 18(e),18(i), 18(j)judicial performance, commission on: members, staff, etc.: actions againstVI 18(g), 18(h)legislature members’ immunity from civil processIV 14libelous or slanderous campaign statementVII 10state, suits againstIII 5taxes, actions re recovery of taxes claimed illegalXIII 32University of California regents: power to sue and be suedIX 9(f)water rights and water quality, proceedings reX A 6ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIESstatute’s unconstitutionality, declaration of, prohibitedIII 3.5ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR OF COURTSappointment and dutiesVI 6AGE alcoholic beverage sale or service to persons under age 21 prohibited XX 22 electorsII 2judges’ retirementVI 20AGED AIDfederal aid, state co-operation re, authorization for XVI 10property, encumbrance on, release, etc., of XVI 13property tax payments on residences of persons 62 years or older: post- ponementXIII 8.5state support of institutions forXVI 3AGENCIES, STATEbudget information, governor, etc., may requireIV 12(b)budget, submission ofIV 12(f)information re duties, governor may requireV 4AGRICULTURAL ASSOCIATIONS, DISTRICTofficers and employees of, civil service exemption forVII 4(l)AID. See AGED AID; BLIND PERSONS; CALIFORNIA, STATE OF.AIR CARRIERSalcoholic beverages, sale, etc., ofXX 22AIR FORCE. See MILITARY, NAVAL, ETC., SERVICE; VETERANS. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL APPEALS BOARDmembers of, appointment by governor ofXX 22members of, removal ofXX 22powers and dutiesXX 22ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL, DEPARTMENT OFpowers and dutiesXX 22ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL, DIRECTOR OF appointmentXX 22civil service exempt employees, appointment ofXX 22removal ofXX 22ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGESage 21, sale, etc., to persons under, prohibitedXX 22appeals board, alcoholic beverage control. See ALCOHOLIC BEVER- AGE CONTROL APPEALS BOARD.AyArticleSectionALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES—continueddepartment of alcoholic beverage control. See ALCOHOLIC BEVER- AGE CONTROL, DEPARTMENT OF.director of alcoholic beverage control. See ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL, DIRECTOR OF.importation and exportation, regulation ofXX 22legislature, powers and duties ofXX 22 licenses—fees and taxesXX 22 premisesXX 22state’s rights and powers reXX 22suspension or revocationXX 22 types ofXX 22manufacture or sale in stateXX 22taxes, excise, board of equalization shall assess and collectXX 2221 years of age, sale to persons under, prohibitedXX 22ALIENSproperty rightsI 20ALLOCATION BOARD, STATEschool district funds for construction purposes, legislative membervoting reXVI 1ALUMNI ASSOCIATION OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIAadvisory committee on the selection of regents, appointment of alumnusto theIX 9(e)president and vice president as ex officio regentsIX 9(Ay)APPEALS. See also REVIEW.alcoholic beverage control, department of, decisions ofXX 22libelous or slanderous campaign statementVII 10APPEALS BOARDS, ASSESSMENTcreation, etc., by county board of supervisors XIII 16APPROPRIATIONS. See also FUNDS; MONEY; REVENUES, STATE.bills, appropriation. See LEGISLATURE—bills.capitol, state, building, fixtures and furniture, repair and maintenance ofIV 28(c)capitol, state, restoration, alteration or modification reIV 28(Ay)general fund—two-thirds vote requirementIV 12(d)government spending limitation— appropriations limit— adjustments—categories added or removed by judgment of court XIII B 11emergency, exceeding limit in event of XIII B 3(c) 1986–87 fiscal year XIII B 10.5 transfer of services to another governmental entity XIII B 3(Ay)transfer of services to private entity XIII B 3(b) annual calculations: audit XIII B 1.5 appropriations subject to limitation, definitions of XIII B 8(Ay), 8(b),8(i), 9, 12, 13, 14, 15appropriations subject to limitation, exceptions to XIII B 8(i), 9, 12, 13, 14, 15 capital outlay projects XIII B 9(d) children and families first act of 1998 XIII B 13contributions to funds derived from proceeds of taxes XIII B 5 definition XIII B 8(h)establishment or change by electors XIII B 4healthcare, research and prevention tobacco tax act of 2016, California XIII B 14AyArticleSectionAPPROPRIATIONS—continuedgovernment spending limitation—continued appropriations limit—continued 1978–79 fiscal year XIII B 8(h) 1986–87 fiscal year XIII B 10.5 road repair and accountability act of 2017 XIII B 15 special districts XIII B 9(c)total annual appropriations subject to limitation XIII B 1bonded indebtedness, obligations re existing or future XIII B 7, 8(g)community colleges: funding XVI 8cost of living, changes in XIII B 1, 8(e)debt service, definition of XIII B 8(g)effective date of provisions re XIII B 10 funds, contingency, emergency, unemployment, etc.: establishment XIII B 5local government, definition of XIII B 8(d)mandates of courts or federal government XIII B 9(b)population, changes in XIII B 1, 8(f)population, determination of XIII B 8(f)proceeds of taxes, definition of XIII B 8(c)revenues in excess of amount appropriated— return XIII B 2 sources XIII B 9(e) transfer and allocation to state school fund XIII B 2(Ay)XVI 8.5 school fundingXVI 8severability of provisions re XIII B 11state-mandated new programs or higher levels of service XIII B 6pro rata, to counties, cities, etc. XVI 3school support, sectarian or denominational, prohibitedIX 8XVI 5state officers, salaries ofIII 4(Ay)statutes for usual current expenses of state effective immediatelyIV 8(c)taxes on real and personal property raised for: ratioXIII 22warrants on state treasuryXVI 7APPROPRIATIONS, WATERsales, rentals, etc., regulation by stateX 5AQUEDUCTSassessments, etc. XIII 19ARBITRATIONworkers’ compensation disputesXIV 4ARCHITECTURAL AND ENGINEERING SERVICES government contractingXXII 1, 2 ARMY. See also MILITARY, NAVAL, ETC., SERVICE; VETERANS.standing army prohibited in time of peaceI 5ART GALLERIESHuntington, Henry E., library and art galleryXIII 4(c)ARTISANSmechanics’ liens, enforcement of XIV 3ASSEMBLY. See also LEGISLATURE.adjournment or recess—adjournment sine die IV 3day to dayIV 7(Ay)10 days, recesses for more than: consent of other houseIV 7(d)bills. See also LEGISLATURE. budget bill—introduction by each houseIV 12(c) caucusIV 7(c)AyArticleSectionASSEMBLY—continued committees— proceedings—audio or video recording 7(c) open and publicIV 7(c) selection ofIV 11compensation of membersIV 4constitution, amendments to, proposal of XVIII 1 districts—80 assembly districts, division of state intoIV 6 reapportionment ofXXI 1employees of, civil service exemption forVII 4(Ay)goals and objectives: reportIV 22 governor’s appointments, confirmation of—constitutional offices, vacancies inV 5(b)impeachment, sole power ofIV 18(Ay)journal ofIV 7(b)legislative power vested inIV 1 members—absent members, compelling attendance ofIV 7(Ay)civil process, not subject toIV 14 compensationIV 4conflict of interestIV 5 districtsIV 6 election— approval by houseIV 5(Ay) date ofIV 2(b) residency 2(c) termsIV 2(Ay) vacancyIV 2(d) expensesIV 4expulsion by two-thirds voteIV 5ineligibility for other state offices or employmentIV 13influencing vote ofIV 15judicial council, membership onVI 6 mileageIV 4oath of officeXX 3 qualifications— approval by houseIV 5(Ay) electorIV 2(c) residence and citizenship 2(c)years of service, maximumIV 2(c) recall ofII 14(b) retirementIV 4XX 6succession in war- or enemy-caused disasterIV 21(Ay)suspension by two-thirds voteIV 5(Ay) terms IV 2(Ay)vote of: felony to influence by bribery, etc. IV 15years of service, maximumIV 2(Ay), 2(c) membershipIV 2(Ay) officers—appointed, civil service exemption forVII 4(Ay) choosing ofIV 7(Ay) organizationIV 3(Ay) proceedings—audio or video recording 7(c)open and publicIV 7(c)AyArticleSectionASSEMBLY—continuedquorum ofIV 7(Ay) rules— adoptionIV 7(Ay) sessions— closed sessionsIV 7(c) regularIV 3(Ay) specialIV 3(b) speaker—University of California board of regents, selection of advisory committee re: membership and appointmentsIX 9(e)speaker as ex officio member of—state colleges, governing body ofXX 23University of California, regents of theIX 9(Ay)vacancy, election to fillIV 2(d)vote recordation in journalIV 7(b)ASSEMBLY, RIGHT OFguaranteed to peopleI 3ASSESSMENTSappeals boards, county, creation, powers, etc., of 16 aqueductsXIII 19 canalsXIII 19car companies, property of 19disaster areas or regions, taxable property damaged or destroyed inXIII 15 ditchesXIII 19electric companies, property of 19equalization of property contained in assessment roll, etc. XIII 18exemptions from—burial plots, etc., property used forXIII 3(g) flumesXIII 19full cash value, assessment atXIII 1gas companies, property of 19golf courses, nonprofit, real property used forXIII 10improvements, replacement, etc., subsequent to March 1954XIII 11land owned outside boundaries, definition reXIII 11land owned outside boundaries, valuation, etc., of 11lands and improvements separately assessedXIII 13lien date in 1967 deemed as lien date in 1966XIII 11lien date of 1967, valuation on XIII 11lien date of 1968, assessment subsequent toXIII 11local governmental agency land outside its boundaries: adjustments, etc., by state board of equalizationXIII 11ocean marine taxXIII 28(g)open space lands, practices reXIII 8 pipelinesXIII 19place of assessmentXIII 14private control, prohibition re delegation of power from county or municipal corporation toXI 11(Ay)property, damaged or destroyedXIII 15property, personal, rates, etc., re unsecured propertyXIII 12public utilitiesXIII 19railroad companies, property of 19single family dwellingsXIII 9 special assessments re acquisition of property for public use XVI 19special assessments re public improvements XVI 19telegraph and telephone companies, property of 19voter approval of local taxes, assessments, fees, chargesXIII C 1, 2, 3XIII D 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 AyArticleSectionASSESSMENTS—continuedwater consumption or usage outside boundaries, limitations on assessments reXIII 11ASSESSORS county—elected county assessorsXI 1(b), 4(c) immature forest trees, board to determine tax exemptions on: membershipXIII 3(j)property owned by other than state assessee, duties reXIII 19ASSOCIATIONS. See also INSURANCE ASSOCIATIONS; NON- PROFIT COOPERATIVE ASSOCIATIONS.energy alternative sources, facilities financed by bond issuance for: lease, etc. XVI 14.5ASYLUMSinstitutions not state managed or controlled, appropriations for purpose or benefit ofXVI 3ATTAINDER, BILL OF prohibitedI 9ATTORNEY GENERALchief law officerV 13 compensationV 14(Ay), 14(d), 14(e)district attorneys and sheriffs, supervision ofV 13election ofV 11gifts: restrictionsV 14(c)honorarium: prohibitionV 14(b) initiative and referendum titles and summaries, preparation ofII 10(d)judicial appointments, commission on, membership onVI 7 lobbyingV 14(e)powers and dutiesV 136 deputies or employees of: civil service exemptionVII 4(m)term of officeV 11vacancy in office of, appointment to fillV 5(b)ATTORNEYS state bar membership requirementVI 9ATTORNEYS IN FACT insurersXIII 28(Ay) ArticleSectionBAILdenial of bail for specified crimesI 12excessive not requiredI 12, 28fixing of: considerationsI 12, 28grant or denial of bail or recognizance release: inclusion of reason for decision in record and court minutesI 28serious felony, arrestee for: hearing before judge and notice to prosecutor before releaseI 28sureties, sufficientI 12, 28 BALLOT MEASURES applicationIV 8.5XI 7.5BANKING ASSOCIATIONS, NATIONALtaxation of 27 BANKS loans: interest ratesXV 1motor vehicle license and registration feesXIII 27public moneys, deposit ofXI 11(b)taxation of 27BANKS, SUPERINTENDENT OFloan interest ratesXV 1BAR OF CALIFORNIA, STATE judges—disciplinary proceedings againstVI 18(e) membershipVI 15, 21judicial council: membershipVI 6judicial performance, commission on: membershipVI 8public corporationVI 9BAR, STATE. See BAR OF CALIFORNIA, STATE.BAYS. See HARBORS, BAYS, ETC.BIDS. See also CONTRACTS.University of California, competitive bidding procedures re construction contracts, etc., ofIX 9(Ay), 9(f)BILL OF ATTAINDER. See ATTAINDER, BILL OF.BILLS, LEGISLATIVE. See LEGISLATURE—bills.BINGO GAMEScharitable purposes, forIV 19(c)BIOMASSfacilities utilizing, revenue bonds to finance XVI 14.5 BLIND PERSONS. See also DISABLED PERSONS; PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSONS. aid—administrative restrictions on expenditures prohibited 3income not to be regarded as income to any other personXVI 3legislature’s power to grantXVI 3veterans’ property tax exemptionXIII 4(Ay)BArticleSectionBOARDS OF EDUCATION. See EDUCATION, BOARDS OF;EDUCATION, CITY BOARDS OF; EDUCATION, COUNTY BOARDS OF; EDUCATION, STATE BOARD OF.BOARDS, STATEcivil service exempt positionsVII 4(d), 4(e)BOATS, SHIPS, ETC. See VESSELS.BOND PROCEEDS FUND, GENERAL OBLIGATIONcreation, etc., ofXVI 1.5BONDS. See also INDEBTEDNESS.acts or statutes re, submission ofXVI 2(Ay) cities—issuance by, requirements for XVI 18constitutional amendment for issuance, etc., prohibition re submission ofXVI 2(Ay) counties—issuance by, requirements for XVI 18 districts— schools— issuance byIX 6 XVI 18energy, financing of facilities for alternative sources of XVI 14.5general obligation bond proceeds fund, creation, etc., ofXVI 1.5governmental agencies—taxation, exemption fromXIII 3(c)interest, principal, registration, etc. XI 11(b)local government—indebtedness, obligations re existing or futureXIII B 7, 8(g)interest: income tax exemptionXIII 26(b) limitationsXIII 20XIII A 1motor vehicle revenues, use for payment onXIX 5 XIX D 1 pollution control facilities, environmental, acquisition, etc., of XVI 14public bondsXI 11(b)school building repair, etc., indebtedness forXIII A 1(b) XVI 18 state—deficit recovery bondsXVI 1.3 general obligation bonds—interest rate, maximum, on unsold bonds, raising ofXVI 1indebtedness, obligations re existing or futureXIII B 7, 8(g)interest: income tax exemptionXIII 26(b)stem cell research XXXV 6taxation, exemption fromXIII 3(c)taxation, etc. XIII 2towns and townships—issuance by, requirements re XVI 18BOUNDARIES countyXI 1(Ay) stateIII 2taxation or exemptions affecting property involved in change, etc., of XIII 23BRIBERYlegislator’s vote, felony to influenceIV 15office, disqualification fromVII 8(Ay)office, exclusion fromVII 8(b)BUDGETagencies, state, submission, etc., byIV 12(f)appropriations from general fund— limitations onIV 12(d)balanced budget requirementIV 12(g) bill— action onIV 8(Ay)appropriation bills, passage beforeIV 12(c)balanced budget requirementIV 12(g)emergency bills passage beforeIV 12(c)failure to pass on timeIV 12(h) fiscal emergenciesIV 10(f) introductionIV 8(Ay), 12(c) item vetoesIV 10(e)majority vote requirementIV 12(e)passage by June 15 of each yearIV 12(c)deficit fundingXVI 1.3general fund. See FUNDS—state.governor to submitIV 12(Ay)reserve policy, state XVI 20XVI 21XVI 22BUILDING AND LOAN ASSOCIATIONSloans: interest ratesXV 1BUILDINGSproperty tax exemptionXIII 3(e), 3(f), 5BURIAL PLOTStax exemption re property used forXIII 3(g)BUSINESSdisqualification because of sex, race, etc., prohibitedI 8CArticleSectionCAFETERIASalcoholic beverages, sale, etc., ofXX 22CALIFORNIA, STATE OFagencies, state—budgets, submission, etc., ofIV 12(f)claims by, filing ofIV 12(f) aid—aged indigent personsXVI 3 blindXVI 3children, abandoned, etc., institutions conducted for the support, etc., ofXVI 3disaster or emergency aid or assistance in clearing debris, etc., from private lands or watersXVI 6 hospital constructionXVI 3 institutions, certainXVI 3orphans, institutions conducted for support, etc., ofXVI 3 physically handicappedXVI 3relief administration, reimbursement of counties for XVI 11school system, publicIX 6schools, sectarian or denominational, public money for, prohibited IX 8XVI 5veterans’ farms or homes, etc. XVI 6 bonds—interest: income tax exemptionXIII 26(b)maximum interest rate on unsold, raising ofXVI 1taxation, exemption fromXIII 3(c)boundaries: definitionIII 2budget, balancedIV 12(g) budget deficit fundingXVI 1.3constitution. See CONSTITUTION, CALIFORNIA.counties as legal subdivisions ofXI 1(Ay)debt limitationsXVI 1executive power vested in governorV 1fiscal emergenciesIV 10(f)food products, sales or use taxes on: prohibitionXIII 34government in case of war- or enemy-caused disasterIV 21governor’s yearly report re condition of state and recommendationsV 3grant or donation of property prohibited 3language, official: EnglishIII 6officers. See also CONSTITUTIONAL OFFICERS; OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES, PUBLIC.assignments, executive, by governor, authorization forV 6bribery, disqualification forVII 8(Ay)budget data, governor may requestIV 12(b)compensation prescribed by statuteV 14(Ay), 14(d)deputy or employees of, civil service exemption forVII 4(e), 4(g)election, time ofII 20V 11exemption from civil serviceVII 4(c), 4(f)impeachment, subject toIV 18(b)information re duties, governor may requireV 4oath or affirmation of officeXX 3overthrow of government, etc., advocation of, as disqualificationVII 9(Ay) recall procedureII 14, 15, 17, 18relief, administration of XVI 11CArticleSectionCALIFORNIA, STATE OF—continued officers—continuedsalaries, reductions in, prohibitedIII 4(Ay) termsII 20V 11overthrow by force or violence, advocating: disqualification from public office, etc. VII 9property belonging to: exemption from taxationXIII 3(Ay)property, surplus: saleIII 9Sacramento as capital ofIII 2seat of government, temporary, during war- or enemy-caused disaster IV 21(e)spending limitation, government. See APPROPRIATIONS—government spending limitation.subversives, disqualification of, re office or employmentVII 9(Ay)suits againstIII 5taxes, actions to prevent or enjoin collection by state: prohibitionXIII 32treasury, moneys drawn from, by warrant onlyXVI 7United States, inseparable part of theIII 1water, appropriations, etc., of, regulation ofX 5water resources, beneficial use ofX 2CANALSassessments, etc. XIII 19irrigation districts: stockholding in domestic or foreign corporations ..XVI 6CAPITAL OFFENSES. See also OFFENSES. bailI 12CAPITAL, STATESacramento, city ofIII 2CAPITOL, STATErepair and maintenance of building, fixtures and furniture,appropriations or expenditures forIV 28(b), 28(c)west wing restoration, alteration or modification re, appropriations for . IV 28(Ay)CAR COMPANIESassessment, annual, of property of 19CASINOS prohibitionIV 19(e)CENSUS, FEDERALgovernment spending limitation, population adjustments reXIII B 1, 8(f)reapportionment followingXXI 1CERTIORARIjurisdiction, originalVI 10CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS. See also INSTITUTIONS.inmate help, etc.: civil service exemptionVII 4(j)CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONSbuildings under constructionXIII 4(b), 5property, tax exemptXIII 4(b), 5CHARTERS cities—adoption, amendment, etc. XI 3(Ay)boards of education: member qualifications, etc. IX 16charter commission, election ofXI 3(c)conflict of measures, highest affirmative vote prevails whenXI 3(d)county assumption of municipal functionsXI 8(b)employees, appointment, etc., of, provisions reXI 5(b)existing charters and municipal affairs, superseding ofXI 5(Ay) generallyXI 5initiative, repeal or amendment byXI 3(b)officers, compensation, etc., of, provisions reXI 5(b)police, regulation of, provisions reXI 5(b)CArticleSectionCHARTERS—continued cities—continuedsecretary of state, filing withXI 3(Ay)statutes, official state, publication inXI 3(Ay)subgovernment, provisions reXI 5(b)city and county—conflicting charter county powers superseded by charter city powersXI 6(b)commissions, charterXI 3(b), 3(c)consolidation, city and countyXI 6(Ay) counties—adoption, amendment, etc. XI 3(Ay)assessors, elected, provision forXI 4(c)charter commission, election ofXI 3(c)compensation, provisions reXI 4(b), 4(c)conflict of measures, highest affirmative vote prevails whenXI 3(d)district attorneys, elected, provision forXI 4(c) education, county boards of, providing for election, etc., of members ofIX 3.3employee appointments, duties, etc., provisions reXI 4(f)existing charter and laws superseded by adoption of new charterXI 3(Ay) generallyXI 4governing bodies, provisions reXI 4(Ay), 4(b),4(e), 4(f)initiative, repeal or amendment byXI 3(b)municipal functions, assumption ofXI 8(b)officers, county, provisions reXI 4(c), 4(e)secretary of state, filing withXI 3(Ay)sheriffs, elected, provision forXI 4(c)statutes, functions required by, inclusion ofXI 4(d)statutes, official state, publication inXI 3(Ay)supersedes general lawXI 4(g)CHIEF JUSTICE. See JUDGES AND JUSTICES—supreme court.CHIEF LAW OFFICERattorney generalV 13CHILDRENaid, state, toXVI 3 grandchildren—property transfers from grandparents to XIII A 2(h) health care services funding: income and sales tax temporary increaseXIII 36property transfers from parents to XIII A 2(h)CHILDREN AND FAMILIES FIRST ACT OF 1998 XIII A 7 XIII B 13CHURCHESaid, public, prohibited 5tax exempt propertyXIII 3(f), 4(b), 5CIGARETTES. See TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS.CITIES. See also CITY AND COUNTY; LOCAL GOVERNMENT;MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS.aged aid, money expenditures re XVI 10aged indigent, state pro rata appropriations for support ofXVI 3alcoholic beverage license fees or occupation taxes, apportionments re .. XX 22annexations, approval by majority of electors forXI 2(b)assessments, special, re public improvements, etc. XVI 19bingo games for charitable purposes, authorization forIV 19(c)blind, state pro rata appropriations for support ofXVI 3boards of education, elected or appointed, charter provisions reIX 16CArticle SectionCITIES—continued bonds—indebtedness for public school repair, etc., purposes XVI 18issuance, requirements re XVI 18 charters. See CHARTERS.claims against, presentation, etc., of, procedure reXI 12community redevelopment projects, taxable property of, powers re XVI 16consolidation with county as charter city and countyXI 6(Ay)consolidation with county as charter city and county: Sacramento CountyXX 1consolidations, approval by majority of electors forXI 2(b)county performance of municipal functionsXI 8credit, giving or lending of, prohibited 6debt limitations or majority protest re special assessmentsXVI 19 employees. See subheading, officers and employees.formation of, procedure forXI 2(Ay)funds, temporary transfer ofXVI 6general law, laws, etc., construction of provisions reXI 13governing bodies—charters, proposal or revision ofXI 3(b) compensation or allowance, extra, grant to contractors of, prohibition reXI 10(Ay)compensation or allowance, extra, grant to officer or employee of,prohibition reXI 10(Ay)funds, temporary transfer of, resolution reXVI 6housing project, low rent, approval of XXXIV 1indebtedness or liability, limitations on XVI 18initiative powers, electors’ exercise ofII 11insurance pooling arrangement: joint powers agreement, etc. XVI 6motor vehicle revenues: allocations, etc., to citiesXIX 4officers and employees—charter provisions reXI 5(b)claims against, procedure reXI 12 compensationXI 5(b)compensation or allowance, extra, prohibitedIV 17XI 10(Ay)oath or affirmation of officeXX 3 residence requirementXI 10(b)subversives, disqualification ofVII 9(Ay)ordinances, enforcement ofXI 7orphaned, abandoned, etc., children, state pro rata appropriations for support ofXVI 3physically handicapped persons, state pro rata appropriations for support ofXVI 3 police. See POLICE.powers of, distribution ofXI 13powers of, providing forXI 2(Ay)property acquisition for public use, special assessments for XVI 19property of—grant or donation for any religious sect, etc., prohibited 5public improvements, special assessments for XVI 19public utilities—commission, public utilities, power ofXII 8establishment, etc., regulations reXI 9(b) regulationXII 8referendum powers, electors’ exercise ofII 11regulations, enforcement ofXI 7sales or use tax revenues, local, apportionment of, contracts reXIII 29subversives, disqualification of, re office or employmentVII 9(Ay)tax assessment and collection, power of 24tax exemption for subversive persons or groups prohibitedVII 9(b)taxes, special, on districts, imposition of XIII A 4tideland sales toX 3 tort liability or public liability losses: payment through insurance pooling arrangementXVI 6 unemployment insurance: payment through insurance pooling arrangementXVI 6vehicle license fees: allocation to citiesXI 15 workers’ compensation: payment through insurance pooling arrangementXVI 6CITIZENS COMPENSATION COMMISSION, CALIFORNIA creation, etc. III 8CITIZENSHIPgovernor, United States citizenship as qualification forV 2vote, qualification forII 2CITY AND COUNTY. See also CITIES; COUNTIES.aged aid, money expenditures re XVI 10aged indigent, state pro rata appropriations for support ofXVI 3 alcoholic beverage license fees and occupation taxes, apportionments reXX 22assessments, special, re public improvements, etc. XVI 19blind, state pro rata appropriations for support ofXVI 3charter city and county, definition ofXI 6(b)churches, aid to, prohibited 5community redevelopment projects, taxable property of, powers re XVI 16consolidation as charter city and countyXI 6(Ay)credit, giving or lending of, prohibited 6debt limitations or majority protest re special assessments XVI 19 employees. See subheading, officers and employees.funds, temporary transfer ofXVI 6governing body—funds, temporary transfer of, resolution reXVI 6insurance pooling arrangement: joint powers agreement, etc. XVI 6motor vehicle revenues: allocations, etc., to city and countyXIX 4officers and employees—oath of officeXX 3subversives, disqualification ofVII 9(Ay)orphaned, abandoned, etc., children, state pro rata appropriations for support ofXVI 3physically handicapped persons, state pro rata appropriations for support ofXVI 3property acquisition for public use, special assessments for XVI 19property of—grant or donation for any religious sect, etc., prohibited 5public improvements, special assessments for XVI 19religious sects, aid to, prohibited 5sales or use tax revenues, local, apportionment of, contracts resectarian purposes, aid for, prohibited 5subversives, disqualification of, re office or employmentVII 9(Ay)tax exemptions for subversive persons or groups prohibitedVII 9(b)tideland sales toX 3tort liability or public liability losses: payment through insurance pooling arrangement XVI 6 unemployment insurance: payment through insurance pooling arrangementXVI 6water supplied to, franchise to collect rates, etc., for use ofX 6 workers’ compensation: payment through insurance pooling arrangementXVI 6CArticleSectionCIVIL OFFICEdual officeholding prohibitedVII 7CIVIL SERVICE, STATE. See also PERSONNEL BOARD, STATE.appointments based on meritVII 1(b) county, city, etc., work previously performed by: employees’ continuation in position under state civil serviceVII 6(c)exempt positions—alcoholic beverage control, director of, positions underXX 22continuation in positions brought under civil serviceVII 6(b) generallyVII 4 superintendent of public instruction, deputy and associates ofIX 2.1officers and employees included inVII 1(Ay)personnel board, state: executive officerVII 2(c)promotions based on meritVII 1(b)temporary appointmentsVII 5veterans’ preferenceVII 6(Ay)veteran’s surviving spouse, civil service preference forVII 6(Ay)CLAIMSagainst cities or counties, procedure forXI 12local government, payment of unauthorized claim by, prohibition re ..XI 10(Ay)state agencies, filing byIV 12(f)CLONINGhuman reproductive cloning XXXV 3CLUBSalcoholic beverages, sale, etc., ofXX 22COAST GUARD. See MILITARY, NAVAL, ETC., SERVICE; VETERANS.COASTAL ZONEstate property purchased with certain tax revenues, transfer of surplus XIX 10COGENERATION TECHNOLOGYfacilities utilizing, revenue bonds to finance XVI 14.5COGSWELL POLYTECHNICAL COLLEGEtaxation, exemption fromXIII 4(c)COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES. See COGSWELL POLYTECHNI- CAL COLLEGE; COLLEGES, NONPROFIT; COLLEGES, PRIVATE; COLLEGES, STATE; COMMUNITY COLLEGES, CALIFORNIA; STANFORD UNIVERSITY, LELAND, JR.; UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA.COLLEGES, NONPROFITincome: income tax exemptionXIII 26(c)taxation, exemption fromXIII 3(e), 5COLLEGES, PRIVATEpublic aid to sectarian, etc., prohibited 5COLLEGES, STATEassembly speaker as ex officio member re management, etc., ofXX 23officers and employees of: civil service exemptionVII 4(h)property of, tax exemption forXIII 3(d)COLORbusiness, etc., disqualification because of color, prohibitedI 8discrimination or preferential treatment because of: prohibitionI 31COMMISSIONScivil service exempt positionsVII 4(b), 4(d), 4(e)fish and gameIV 20(b)industrial accidentXIV 4judicial appointmentsVI 7judicial performanceVI 8minimum wages, legislative, executive, and judicial powers reXIV 1public utilitiesXII 1CArticleSectionCOMMITTEES, LEGISLATIVE bills—31st day, hearing or actionIV 8(Ay) caucusIV 7(c) officers and employees of, civil service exemption forVII 4(Ay) proceedings—audio or video recording 7(c)open and publicIV 7(c) selectionIV 11sessions, closedIV 7(c) COMMON CARRIERSalcoholic beverages, sale, etc., ofXX 22legislative control ofXII 3public utility, subject to control and regulation asXII 3COMMUNICATIONSmunicipal corporations, operation, etc., of public works byXI 9(Ay)COMMUNITY COLLEGES, CALIFORNIAboards of education: elected or appointed member qualifications, etc.: charter provisionsIX 16bonded indebtednessXIII A 1(b)XVI 18(b) districts—allocation from state school fundXVI 8.5incorporation, organization, etc. IX 14instructional improvement and accountability, expenditures forXVI 8.5(d)support, revenues forXVI 8, 8.5 enrollment—changes in enrollment: allocationsXVI 8(f) property of, tax exemption forXIII 3(d)public school system stabilization account: funding reserve XVI 21COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENTproject property, taxation of XVI 16COMMUTATIONSgovernor, granting byV 8(Ay)COMPANIES. See name of particular type of company (e.g., INSUR- ANCE COMPANIES).COMPENSATION. See also SALARIES, WAGES, ETC.assessment appeals boards membersXIII 16attorney generalV 14(Ay), 14(d), 14(e) citizens compensation commission, CaliforniaIII 8city officers and employees, charter provisions reXI 5(b)city officers and employees, extra compensation for, prohibitedIV 17 XI 10(Ay)controller, stateV 14(Ay), 14(d), 14(e)county governing bodiesXI 1(b), 4(b)county officersXI 1(b)county officers and employees, extra compensation for, prohibitedIV 17XI 10(Ay)county officers, charter provision reXI 4(c)eminent domain, taking of private property byI 19 governorV 14(Ay), 14(d), 14(e) judgesVI 19legislative employeesIV 7.5 legislatorsIV 4, 7.5legislators, terms of, effect re reduction inXX 6CArticleSectionCOMPENSATION—continued lieutenant governorV 14(Ay), 14(d), 14(e)personnel board, state, executive officer ofVII 2(c)public officers and employees, grant of extra compensation or allowance for, prohibitedIV 17XI 10(Ay)secretary of stateV 14(Ay), 14(d), 14(e) state officer, secretary of an agency or director of a department appointed by the governorV 14(e)superintendent of public instructionV 14(Ay), 14(d), 14(e)treasurer, stateV 14(Ay), 14(d), 14(e) workers’ compensation awards XIV 4 COMPENSATION INSURANCE FUND, STATE establishment and management of 4 insurer, inclusion in definition of 28(Ay)ratification and confirmation of 4 COMPENSATION, WORKERS’. See WORKERS’ COMPENSATION.CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS reapportionment XXI 1 CONSCIENCE liberty of, guaranteedI 4 CONSERVATION open space lands, assessment practices re XIII 8 water resources X 2 CONSOLIDATIONS county XI 1(Ay)CONSTITUTION, CALIFORNIA. See also CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS.amendments by electors—initiative, amendment by XVIII 3 amendments by initiative—majority approval required XVIII 4 one subject only II 8(d) proposal of II 8(Ay), 8(b) XVIII 3 amendments by legislature—naming of individuals or private corporations prohibited II 12 procedure XVIII 1 two-thirds vote required XVIII 1 amendments or revision, conflicts in approved measures re XVIII 4 amendments or revision, effective date of XVIII 4 bond issuance, etc., amendments re, prohibited 2(Ay)bond issues, previous, provisions re: repeal and continuance as statutes . XVI 2(b), 2(c)convention to revise, calling of XVIII 2 revision, convention for purpose of XVIII 2 revision of, proposals re XVIII 1 rights guaranteed as independent from United States Constitution I 24 CONSTITUTION, UNITED STATES law, supreme, of the land III 1 CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTIONS calling of XVIII 2 CONSTITUTIONAL OFFICERS. See also name of particular officer (e.g., GOVERNOR).election, time ofII 20CArticleSectionCONSTITUTIONAL OFFICERS—continued retirement— allowanceIII 7terms, commencement ofII 20vacancies in office, appointments to fillV 5(b)CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS. See also CONSTITUTION, CALIFORNIA.criminal defendant, rights ofI 24, 30 hospital facilities, loans guaranteed forXVI 4joinder of criminal casesI 30(Ay) local government: terms general law, general laws and lawsXI 13mandatory and prohibitory: constitutional provisionsI 26marine resources protection act of 1990X B 2(b), 4(b),15, 16 motor vehicle revenuesXIX 8public housing project law XXXIV 2, 3public utilities commission powersXII 2, 9tax lien cessation or payment of taxes after 30 yearsXIII 30CONTEMPT news reporters’, etc., refusal to disclose information sources: adjudged in contempt prohibitedI 2(b)CONTRACTORSextra compensation or extra allowance from city, county, etc., prohibition reIV 17 extra compensation or extra allowance, granting by county or city of, prohibition reXI 10(Ay)CONTRACTS. See also BIDS.architectural and engineering servicesXXII 1, 2 discrimination or preferential treatment: prohibitionI 31impairment of taxing power, prohibitedXIII 31inmate laborXIV 5law impairing obligation of contractI 9III 4(b)local government contracts performed in whole or in part: prohibition re extra compensation, etc. IV 17XI 10(Ay)low rent housing projects, federal financial assistance re XXXIV 1University of California: competitive bidding proceduresIX 9(Ay), 9(f)CONTROLLER, STATE compensationV 14(Ay), 14(d), 14(e)election ofV 11equalization, state board of, membership onXIII 17gifts: restrictionsV 14(c)honorarium: prohibitionV 14(b) lobbyingV 14(e)recall duties re recall of secretary of stateII 17school fund, state, transfer and allocation of money toXVI 8.5(Ay), 8.5(c)term of officeV 11treasury, state, warrants onXVI 7vacancy in office of, appointment to fillV 5(b)CONVENTIONS, CONSTITUTIONALcalling of XVIII 2COOPERATIVE ASSOCIATIONS, NONPROFIT. See NONPROFIT COOPERATIVE ASSOCIATIONS.CORPORATIONSbar, state, as public corporationVI 9common carriers—legislative control ofXII 3CArticleSectionCORPORATIONS—continuedconstitutional amendments naming private corporations prohibitedII 12energy alternative sources, facilities financed by bond issue for: lease, etc. XVI 14.5foreign or domestic corporations, stock of: acquisition by irrigation districts re water rights, etc. XVI 6 franchises— taxationXIII 27harbors, etc., frontage or tidal lands of, prohibited exclusion of right of way, etc., toX 4institutions not state managed or controlled, appropriations for purpose or benefit ofXVI 3laws concerning, alteration or repeal ofXX 5municipal. See MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS.mutual water corporation, public agency acquisition, etc., of stock in . XVI 17nonprofit corporations. See NONPROFIT CORPORATIONS.pollution control facilities, environmental, lease, etc., of XVI 14public corporations. See PUBLIC CORPORATIONS.public utilities, establishment and operation ofXI 9(b)public utilities subject to regulation and controlXII 3regents of the University of CaliforniaIX 9(Ay), 9(f) stock—subscription, legislature’s authorization of, prohibited 6stockholders, prohibition re state, etc., as: exceptionsXVI 6taxation of 27tideland sales toX 3CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTIONS. See also INSTITUTIONS.inmate help, etc.: civil service exemptionVII 4(j)COST OF LIVINGgovernment spending limitation, adjustments reXIII B 1, 8(e)COUNCILScivil service exempt positionsVII 4(b)COUNTIES. See also CITY AND COUNTY.aged aid, money expenditures re XVI 10aged aid, release, etc., of encumbrances on property re XVI 13aged indigent, state pro rata appropriations for support ofXVI 3 alcoholic beverage license fees or occupational taxes, apportionments reXX 22assessment appeals boards, creation, powers, etc., of 16assessments, prescribing of 16assessments, special, re public improvements, etc. XVI 19 assessors. See ASSESSORS.bingo games for charitable purposes, authorization forIV 19(c)blind, state pro rata appropriations for support ofXVI 3boards of education, county—appointment or election, providing ofIX 7joint boards for two or more counties, election ofIX 7joint boards for two or more counties, establishment ofIX 3.2qualifications and terms of office, providing forIX 3.3superintendent of schools, county, appointment ofIX 3superintendent of schools, county, salary ofIX 3.1(b) bonds—indebtedness for public school repair, etc., purposes XVI 18issuance, requirements re XVI 18boundary changes, approval by governing body ofXI 1(Ay)chartered counties: powers of constitution or statuteXI 4(h) charters. See CHARTERS.churches, aid to, prohibited 5claims against, presentation, etc., of, procedure reXI 12CArticleSectionCOUNTIES—continuedcommunity redevelopment projects, taxable property of, powers re XVI 16consolidation with city as charter city and countyXI 6(Ay)consolidation with city as city and county: Sacramento CountyXX 1consolidations, approval by majority of electors forXI 1(Ay)credit, giving or lending of, prohibited 6debt limitations or majority protest re special assessments XVI 19division of state into legal subdivisionsXI 1(Ay) employees. See subheading, officers and employees.equalization, boards of, assessment appeals boards as constitutingXIII 16equalization, boards of, boards of supervisors to act asXIII 16formation of, approval by majority of electors forXI 1(Ay)funds, temporary transfer ofXVI 6general law, laws, etc., construction of provisions reXI 13governing bodies—assessment appeals boards, creation of 16boundary changes, approval ofXI 1(Ay)charters, proposal or revision ofXI 3(b) compensationXI 1(b), 4(b) compensation or allowance, extra, grant to contractors of, prohibition reXI 10(Ay) compensation or allowance, extra, grant to officer or employee of, prohibition reXI 10(Ay) election ofXI 1(b), 4(Ay)employee appointments, tenure, etc., providing ofXI 1(b)equalization, boards of, supervisors to act asXIII 16funds, temporary transfer of, resolution reXVI 6 powers ofXI 1(b)grand juries, yearly summoning ofI 23housing project, low rent, approval of XXXIV 1indebtedness or liability, limitations on XVI 18initiative powers, electors’ exercise ofII 11insurance pooling arrangement: joint powers agreement, etc. XVI 6motor vehicle revenues: allocations, etc., to countiesXIX 4municipal functions, performance ofXI 8officers and employees—charter provisions reXI 4(c), 4(e)claims against, procedure reXI 12 compensationXI 1(b)compensation or allowance, extra, prohibitedIV 17XI 10(Ay) elected officersXI 1(b)oath or affirmation of officeXX 3 residence requirementXI 10(b)subversives, disqualification ofVII 9(Ay)ordinances, enforcement ofXI 7orphaned, abandoned, etc., children, state pro rata appropriations for support ofXVI 3physically handicapped persons, state pro rata appropriations for support ofXVI 3powers of, distribution ofXI 13private control, etc., of county improvements, etc., prohibitedXI 11(Ay)property acquisition for public use, special assessments for XVI 19property of— damaged or destroyed property: transfer of value to comparable propertyXIII A 2(e) grant or donation for any religious sect, etc., prohibited 5property tax apportionments to districts XIII A 1(Ay)public improvements, special assessments for XVI 19CArticleSectionCOUNTIES—continuedpublic utilities—commission, public utilities, powers ofXII 8 regulationXII 8referendum powers, electors’ exercise ofII 11regulations, enforcement ofXI 7relief, granting, etc., of, reimbursement for XVI 11religious sects, aid to, prohibited 5sales or use tax revenues, local, apportionment of, contracts reXIII 29school taxes, levy of 21schools, county superintendents of— electionsIX 3joint superintendent for two or more counties, establishment ofIX 3.2 qualificationsIX 3.1(Ay) salaryIX 3.1(b)selection, election to determine manner ofIX 3seat of government, temporary: war- or enemy-caused disasterIV 21(e)seat, removal of, two-thirds vote of electorate forXI 1(Ay)sectarian purposes, aid for, prohibited 5 sheriffs. See SHERIFFS.subversives, disqualification of, re office or employmentVII 9(Ay)superior court in each countyVI 4tax exemption for subversive persons or groups, prohibitedVII 9(b)tax exemption of certain low value real property by boards of super visorsXIII 7taxes, special, on districts, imposition of XIII A 4tideland sales toX 3 tort liability or public liability losses: payment through insurance pooling arrangementXVI 6 unemployment insurance: payment through insurance pooling arrange- mentXVI 6vehicle license fees: allocation to countiesXI 15water supplied to, franchise to collect rates, etc., for use ofX 6 workers’ compensation: payment through insurance pooling arrange- mentXVI 6COUNTY BOARDS OF EDUCATION. See EDUCATION, COUNTY BOARDS OF.COUNTY CLERKSsuperior courts, ex officio clerks ofVI 4COUNTY SEATSremoval of, two-thirds vote of electorate forXI 1(Ay)temporary: war- or enemy-caused disasterIV 21(e)COUNTY SUPERINTENDENTS OF SCHOOLS electionIX 3joint superintendent for two or more counties, establishment ofIX 3.2 qualificationsIX 3.1(Ay) salaryIX 3.1(b)selection, election to determine manner ofIX 3COURTS. See also JUDGES AND JUSTICES.administrative director of, appointment, etc., ofVI 6appeal, courts of. See COURTS OF APPEAL. causes submitted but undetermined for 90 days: judges’ salary suspensionVI 19commissioners, appointment ofVI 22eminent domain proceedingsI 19employees, certain, civil service exemption forVII 4(b) English language as official language of California: suits re enforcement: jurisdictionIII 6evidence, comment onVI 10CArticleSectionCOURTS—continuedjudicial power vested inVI 1jurisdiction, appellateVI 11jurisdiction, originalVI 10jurors, number of, in civil or criminal causesI 16justice courts. See JUSTICE COURTS.municipal courtsVI 23 officers— appointmentVI 22civil service exemptionVII 4(b)public utilities commission decision re property confiscation, review of . XII 5pupil school assignments or pupil transportation: review of priordecisions, etc. I 7(Ay)record, courts of: definitionVI 1superior courts. See SUPERIOR COURTS.supreme court. See SUPREME COURT.temporary judges, trials byVI 21trials, new, granting ofVI 13witnesses, testimony and credibility of, comment onVI 10workers’ compensation disputes, settlement of 4COURTS OF APPEAL. See also COURTS.certiorari, original jurisdiction inVI 10commissioners, appointment ofVI 22composition ofVI 3court of recordVI 1decisions in writing that determine causesVI 14decisions reviewed by supreme courtVI 12division of state into districts containingVI 3 divisions— compositionVI 3power and conduct as 3-judge courtVI 3habeas corpus, original jurisdiction inVI 10judgment, concurrence necessary forVI 3judicial performance, commission on, decisionsVI 18(f)judicial power vested inVI 1jurisdiction, appellateVI 11justices. See JUDGES AND JUSTICES.mandamus, original jurisdiction inVI 10opinions, publication ofVI 14prohibition, original jurisdiction inVI 10supreme court judge admonishment, censure, removal or retirement: review of determinationVI 18(f)transfer of cause, jurisdiction inVI 12water rights and water quality, actions reX A 6COURTS OF RECORD. See COURTS.CREDITagricultural credits act of 1923, interest rate on loans reXV 1state, etc., giving or lending of, prohibited 6veterans’ farm or home loans, etc. XVI 6CREDIT UNIONSloans: interest ratesXV 1public moneys, deposit ofXI 11(b)CREDITStaxation, etc., of solvent creditsXIII 2CREEDbusiness, etc., disqualification because of creed, prohibitedI 8CRIMESbail, denial of for certain crimesI 12convictions, priorI 28CArticleSectionCRIMES—continuedexclusion from office forVII 8(b)felony conviction, disqualification as elector when imprisoned, etc., for . II 4legislator’s vote, felony to influence by bribery, etc. IV 15prosecution on information or indictmentI 14, 14.1 restitutionI 28rights of defendant or the peopleI 15, 24, 29servitude, involuntary, only permitted forI 6suffrage, exclusion from right of, for certainVII 8(b)trial by juryI 16victims’ bill of rightsI 28 victims, protection ofI 30(b) CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONSattorney general, byV 13defendant, rights ofI 15, 24 discoveryI 30(c) feloniesI 14, 14.1 impeachment proceedings, criminal punishment not subject to outcome ofIV 18(b)interpreter, right toI 14jeopardy, double, not to be placed inI 15, 24judges, indictment or charges againstVI 18(Ay), 18(c)jurors, number ofI 16jury, right of trial byI 16 people, rights of theI 29 preliminary hearings—hearsay evidence: admissibilityI 30(b) postindictmentI 14.1 prior criminal conviction: use for purposes of impeachment or sentence enhancementI 28victims’ bill of rightsI 28CROPS, GROWINGproperty tax exemptions XIII 3(h) CRUEL OR UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT. See PUNISHMENT. DArticleSectionDATES, DEADLINES, ETC. See TIME.DEATH PENALTYreinstatement of state laws requiring, authorizing, or imposingI 27DEBENTUREStaxation, etc. XIII 2DEBT government spending limitation: debt service on indebtedness existing or authorized as of January 1, 1979 XIII B 8(g)imprisonment for, prohibitedI 10property tax exemption re debt secured by landXIII 3(n)state debt, repayment XVI 20 XVI 21 XVI 22state indebtedness, limitations onXVI 1DEEDS OF TRUSTtaxation, etc. XIII 2DELEGATION OF POWERSprivate control of county or municipal functions, prohibitions reXI 11(Ay)DELTA PROTECTION ACT. See SACRAMENTO-SAN JOAQUIN DELTA.DEPOSITIONScriminal cases, taking inI 15DEPOSITSgeneral obligation bond proceedsXVI 1.5DISABILITYjudge’s retirementVI 18(b), 18(d),18(i), 20 veterans’ property tax exemptionXIII 3(o), 4(Ay)DISABLED PERSONS. See also BLIND PERSONS; PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSONS.buildings: accessibilityXIII A 2(c)property taxation— postponementXIII 8.5replacement dwellings: transfer of base year valuesXIII A 2(Ay) DISASTERSprivate lands and waters, public aid in clearing debris, etc., fromXVI 6taxable property, assessment or reassessment of, followingXIII 15XIII A 2(Ay)taxable property, transfer of value to comparable propertyXIII A 2(Ay), 2(e), 2(f) war- or enemy-caused, legislature’s powers, etc., duringIV 21DISCOVERY criminal casesI 30(c) DISCRIMINATIONbusiness, etc., disqualification because of sex, race, etc., prohibitedI 8public employment, education, or contracting: prohibitionI 31religion, free exercise, etc., ofI 4transportation companies, discriminatory chargesXII 4DISTRICT ATTORNEYSelected county district attorneysXI 1(b), 4(c)supervision by attorney generalV 13DISTRICTS assembly. See ASSEMBLY.courts of appeal divisionsVI 3fish and gameIV 20X B 2(Ay)officers and employees, public, oath of office ofXX 3officers’ and employees’ residence requirementXI 10(b) senate. See SENATE.subversives, disqualification of, re office or employmentVII 9(Ay)taxes on special districts, imposition of XIII A 4DITCHESassessment, etc. XIII 19DIVIDENDSinsurers, as exception to basis of annual tax forXIII 28(c)DUAL OFFICEHOLDINGgovernor: prohibitedV 2lucrative officeholders under United States prohibited from civil office for profit VII 7DUE PROCESS OF LAWcriminal casesI 24, 29 guaranteedI 7(Ay)pupil school assignment or pupil transportationI 7(Ay)EECOLOGICAL RESERVES establishmentX B 14 EDUCATION. See also SCHOOLS.ArticleSectioncollege system, state—assembly speaker as ex officio member re management, etc., ofXX 23common schools, legislature to provide system ofIX 5 legislature’s encouragement by promotion of scientific, intellectual, etc., improvementIX 1public schools—discrimination or preferential treatment: prohibitionI 31salaries of teachersIX 6state aid toIX 6system, public school: definitionIX 6superintendent of public instruction, associates and deputy ofIX 2.1superintendent of public instruction, election ofIX 2EDUCATION, BOARDS OFbond issuance, requirements re XVI 18bonded indebtedness for public school repair, etc., purposes XVI 18indebtedness or liability, limitations on XVI 18EDUCATION, CITY BOARDS OFqualifications, terms, etc.: charter provisionsIX 16EDUCATION, COUNTY BOARDS OFelection or appointment, legislature to provide forIX 7joint boards for two or more counties, establishment ofIX 3.2qualifications and terms of officeIX 3.3superintendent of schools, county, appointment ofIX 3superintendent of schools, county, salary ofIX 3.1(b)EDUCATION, COUNTY OFFICES OFbonded indebtedness XIII A 1(b)XVI 18(b)EDUCATION, STATE BOARD OFappointment or election, legislature to provide forIX 7superintendent of public instruction, deputy and associates of, appoint- ment ofIX 2.1textbooks, adoption ofIX 7.5EDUCATION, STATE DEPARTMENT OFteaching staff of schools under jurisdiction of: civil service exemption .. VII 4(i)ELECTIONS. See also SUFFRAGE; VOTING.assembly membersIV 2(b), 2(d)ballot pamphlet—indebtedness, state, laws re: text and argumentsXVI 1bribery, etc., influence on, laws prohibitingVII 8(b)bribery to procure election to officeVII 8(Ay) cities—annexations or consolidations, vote requirement forXI 2(b)bonded indebtedness, requirements re XVI 18charter provisions reXI 5(b)charter revision or charter commission, initiative forXI 3(c)charters, adoption, amendment, etc., ofXI 3(Ay) nonpartisan officesII 6 officers— charter provisionsXI 5(b)taxes, special, on districts, imposition of XIII A 4congressional officesII 5constitutional convention, calling of XVIII 2constitutional offices, time for election toII 20 counties— assessorsXI 1(b), 4(c)board of education, joint county, and joint county superintendent of schools, establishment ofIX 3.2bonded indebtedness, requirements re XVI 18EArticleSectionELECTIONS—continued counties—continuedcharter revision or charter commission, initiative forXI 3(c)charters, adoption, amendment, etc., ofXI 3(Ay) district attorneysXI 1(b), 4(c)formation or consolidation ofXI 1(Ay) governing bodiesXI 1(b), 4(Ay)mass transit guideways, public, expenditure of certain revenues for .XIX 5 nonpartisan officesII 6seat, county, approval by majority of electors for removal ofXI 1(Ay) sheriffsXI 1(b), 4(c)superintendent of schools, joint, establishment ofIX 3, 3.2superintendent of schools, manner of selection ofIX 3taxes, special, on districts, imposition of XIII A 4county boards of educationIX 3.3county superintendents of schoolsIX 3 electors—appropriations limit establishment or change XIII B 4bond measures, submission ofXVI 2(Ay)city annexations or consolidationsXI 2(b)constitution, California, amendment by initiative XVIII 3county consolidation, SacramentoXX 1county formation or consolidationXI 1(Ay)crimes, disqualification forII 4delta protection act, statutes affectingX A 4equalization, state board of, members of 17fish and wildlife resources, statutes providing for protection ofX A 2housing project, low rent, development, etc., approval of XXXIV 1initiative petition, presentation ofII 8(b)initiative powers, exercise of: cities or countiesII 11 legislative candidatesIV 2Medi-Cal hospital reimbursement improvement act of 2013,amendment of XVI 3.5(Ay)property qualification, prohibitedI 22 qualificationsII 4referendum power to reject statutes, etc. II 9(Ay)referendum powers, exercise of: cities or countiesII 11Sacramento County consolidation as city and countyXX 1Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, statutes providing for protection of existing water rights inX A 2sales or use tax revenues, local, apportionments, contracts reXIII 29seat, county, approval by majority for removal ofXI 1(Ay)water resources development system, state, statutes affecting operation ofX A 2wild and scenic rivers system, state, initiative statute affecting water export fromX A 3free elections, legislature shall provide forII 3 governorV 2housing project, low rent, development, etc., of XXXIV 1indebtedness, state, authorization ofXVI 1initiative measuresII 8(c), 8(e),8(f), 11 judgesVI 16(Ay), 16(b), 16(d)judicial offices, nonpartisanII 6legislature, vacancy inIV 2(d)libelous campaign statementVII 10local general taxXIII C 1, 2, 3EArticleSectionELECTIONS—continuedlocal recall electionsII 19local special taxXIII C 1, 2, 3officers, state— attorney generalV 11 controllerV 11 governorV 2 lieutenant governorV 11secretary of stateV 11superintendent of public instructionII 6IX 2time of electionV 11 treasurerV 11voter-nomination primary electionII 5open presidential primary, providing forII 5personnel board, state: presiding officerVII 2(b)political parties: election rightsII 5president of the United States, candidates for office ofII 5 primary—open presidential primaryII 5 partisan officesII 5voter-nomination primary electionII 5recall procedureII 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19referendum measuresII 9(c)registration, legislature shall provide forII 3residence, legislature shall defineII 3school districts—bonded indebtedness, requirements re XVI 18school offices, nonpartisanII 6 senatorsIV 2(b), 2(d)slanderous campaign statementVII 10statutes calling elections effective immediatelyIV 8(c)voter-nomination primary election, providing forII 5voting, secretII 7war- or enemy-caused disaster, filling of offices duringIV 21(d)ELECTORS. See ELECTIONS.ELECTRIC COMPANIESassessment, annual, of property of 19EMERGENCIESgovernor, declaration by: appropriations spending XIII B 3(c) private lands and waters, public aid in clearing debris, etc., fromXVI 6public works, 8-hour day on, exception toXIV 2EMINENT DOMAINnavigable waters, frontages onX 1property, private, takingI 19public utilities, exercise against, compensation reXII 5 Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta: acquisition of water rights, etc., prohib itedX A 5EMPLOYMENTdiscrimination or preferential treatment: prohibitionI 31disqualification because of sex, race, etc., prohibitedI 8inmate laborXIV 5ENERGYalternative sources, financing of facilities for XVI 14.5ENGINEERING AND ARCHITECTURAL SERVICESgovernment contractingXXII 1, 2ENGLISH LANGUAGEofficial language of CaliforniaIII 6EArticleSectionENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIESrevenue bond issuance re acquisition, etc. XVI 14EQUALIZATION, COUNTY BOARDS OFboards of supervisors to act asXIII 16 dutiesXIII 16laws pertaining to: applicability to assessment appeals boardXIII 16EQUALIZATION, STATE BOARD OF alcoholic beverage sales, etc., assessment and collection of excise taxes onXX 22assessment of utilitiesXIII 19 assessments of property owned by other than state assessee, delegation to local assessorXIII 19 districts—4 districts, division of state intoXIII 17 reapportionmentXXI 1 dutiesXIII 18 insurers, taxation of, assessments reXIII 28(h) local governmental agency land outside its boundaries: adjustment, etc., of assessmentsXIII 11 members— compensationIII 8(Ay), 8(g),8(h), 8(i),8(l)V 14(e) controllerXIII 17 disqualification or forfeiture of office for libelous or slanderous cam- paign statementVII 10election and term of officeXIII 17 gifts: restrictionsV 14(c) honorarium: prohibitionV 14(b) impeachmentIV 18(b) lobbyingV 14(e) recallII 14(b)vacancy, appointment to fillV 5(b) representation on board to determine tax exemptions on immature forest treesXIII 3(j)ESTUARIES. See HARBORS, BAYS, ETC.ETHNIC ORIGIN. See NATIONAL OR ETHNIC ORIGIN. EVIDENCE alcoholic beverage control appeals board, review of department deci- sions byXX 22court comment onVI 10criminal proceedings, inclusion of relevant evidence inI 28hearsay evidence: admissibilityI 30(b) treason, conviction forI 18 truth-in-evidenceI 28EX POST FACTO LAW prohibitedI 9EXECUTIVE OFFICERS. See also OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES, PUBLIC.assignments, executive, and reorganization of functionsV 6duties, information relating to, required by governorV 4EXECUTIVE POWERseparation of powersIII 3vested in governorV 1EXPENDITURES, STATEbudget recommendationsIV 12(Ay)general fund expenditure estimatesIV 12.5EXPORTATIONalcoholic beveragesXX 22FArticleSectionFEDERAL FUNDS. See FUNDS—federal. FELONIES nonviolent: state prison sentences: parole considerationI 32 prosecutionI 14, 14.1 FELONY OFFENSES. See also OFFENSES. bail I 12FINANCE, DIRECTOR OFgeneral fund: revenues and expenditures: estimatesIV 12.5 schools—average class size: determination for transfer or allocation of funds XVI 8.5(Ay)expenditures per student, annual: determination for transfer or allocation of fundsXVI 8.5(Ay)FINES AND FORFEITURESexcessive fines not to be imposedI 17fishing violationsX B 13(Ay), 13(c) militia fine, in peace time, prohibited imprisonment forI 10 state officers, acceptance of free passes, etc., from transportation com- pany: forfeiture of officeXII 7FIRES taxable property: fire sprinkler, extinguishing or detection systems, or egress improvement XIII A 2(c)FISH right of people toI 25FISH AND GAMEcommercial passenger fishing boat licenseX B 8(d) districts, division of state intoIV 20(Ay)ecological reservesX B 14 fines and forfeituresX B 13(Ay), 13(c) funds derived from protection, etc., of, use and expenditure ofXVI 9marine resources protection stamp: feesX B 8(c), 8(d) netsX B 3(Ay), 3(b),4(Ay), 4(b),5, 7(b), 8(e) permits, fishing: fees, reimbursement, etc. X B 6, 7(Ay),7(b), 7(c), 7(d) rockfishX B 4(Ay) sportfishing licenseX B 8(c) violationsX B 11, 13(Ay), 13(b), 13(c)FISH AND GAME COMMISSION ecological reserves: establishment, etc. X B 14legislature’s delegation of power toIV 20(b) members— appointment ofIV 20(b)removal by concurrent resolutionIV 20(b) termsIV 20(b)FISH AND GAME, DEPARTMENT OFcommercial fishing: monitoring program, etc. X B 12 marine resources protection: report, implementation, etc. X B 10 nets, fish: restrictions, etc. X B 4(b), 5(Ay),7(Ay), 8(e) surplus state property transfer to XIX 10FArticleSectionFISH AND WILDLIFE RESOURCESguarantees and protections, provisions forX A 1Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, statutes affecting resources inX A 2, 4San Francisco Bay system, statutes affecting resources inX A 2 Suisun Marsh, statutes providing protection of resources in: voter approvalX A 2FLUMESassessments, etc. XIII 19FOODalcoholic beverages, sale, etc., ofXX 22open space lands used for food production, assessment of 8sales or use taxesXIII 34FOREIGNERS. See ALIENS.FORESTRY, STATE BOARD OF representation on board to determine tax exemptions on immature forest treesXIII 3(j)FRANCHISESleasing or alienation, liabilities not released byXX 4taxation of 27urgency statutes granting: prohibitionIV 8(d)water, right to collect rates, etc., for use ofX 6FREIGHTvessels, certain: exemption from taxationXIII 3(l)FUNDS. See also APPROPRIATIONS; MONEY; REVENUES, STATE. federal—hospital facilities by public agencies, etc., construction ofXVI 3sectarian or denominational schools, support of, prohibitedIX 8XVI 5 state—cigarette and tobacco products surtax fund— revenues, appropriations of B 12compensation insurance fund, state. See COMPENSATION IN- SURANCE FUND, STATE.deficit funding, budgetXVI 1.3fish and game preservation fund— marine resources protection accountX B 8(Ay), 8(b), 9 general fund—appropriation from: two-thirds vote requirementIV 12(d) budget stabilization account XVI 20loans to general fund, payment of XVI 20obligations, payment of unfunded XVI 20public school stabilization account XVI 21revenues and expenditures: estimatesIV 12.5transportation funds, loans of XIX A 1general obligation bond proceeds fund, creation, etc., ofXVI 1.5highway users tax account revenues, use ofXIX 1, 2, 4, 7indebtedness, state: sinking fundXVI 1 institutions not state managed or controlled, appropriations forpurpose or benefit ofXVI 3public safety fund, local—transfers to and allocations fromXIII 35reserve fund, prudent state— establishmentXIII B 5.5 reserve policy, state XVI 20XVI 21XVI 22school fund, state— allocationsXVI 8.5 apportionmentsIX 6subventions to local governments: useXIII 24 transportation fund, state— public transportation accountXIX A 1transportation investment fund— allocationsXIX B 2 use of fundsXIX B 1temporary transfer by treasurer of city, county, or city and countyXVI 6transportation funds, enforcement of provision reXIX C 1, 2, 3, 4transportation funds, local governmentXIX A 2University of CaliforniaIX 9(Ay), 9(f)GArticleSectionGAME. See FISH AND GAME.GAMINGIV 19GAS COMPANIESassessment, annual, of property of 19GIFTSpublic money, etc., prohibited 6separate propertyI 21 state officer, acceptance by: restrictionsV 14(c)GOLF COURSES, NONPROFITreal property, assessment of 10GOVERNMENT. See also CALIFORNIA, STATE OF; UNITED STATES.information, governmental: public accessI 3overthrow by force or violence, unlawful, oath or affirmation reXX 3 overthrow of government, etc., advocation of, as disqualification from holding office, etc. VII 9(Ay)purposes ofII 1right of people to alter or reformII 1subversives, employment of, prohibitedVII 9(Ay)GOVERNMENT SPENDING LIMITATION. See APPROPRIATIONS. GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES. See also CITIES; CITY AND COUNTY; COUNTIES; DISTRICTS; LOCAL GOVERN- MENT; MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS.appropriations, limitation of. See APPROPRIATIONS—government spending limitation.information, governmental: public accessI 3 subventions—exceptions to state funding XIII B 6mandated new programs or higher levels of service: reimbursement . XIII B 6property taxation: revenue losses re homeowners’ exemptionXIII 3(k), 25property taxation: revenue losses re postponement on residences of persons age 62 or older or disabledXIII 8.5use of money subvened to local governmentXIII 24 taxation—assessment, place of 14 bonds: exemptionXIII 3(c)homeowners’ property tax exemptionXIII 25property of: exemptionXIII 3(b)GOVERNOR appointments—alcoholic beverage control appeals boardXX 22alcoholic beverage control, director ofXX 22citizens compensation commission, CaliforniaIII 8(Ay), 8(c),8(d), 8(e) fish and game commissionersIV 20(b)judicial performance, commission onVI 8personnel board, stateVII 2(Ay)public utilities commissionersXII 1 University of California board of regents, selection of, advisory com- mittee reIX 9(e)University of California, regents of theIX 9(Ay) vacancies— citizens compensation commission, CaliforniaIII 8(d) constitutional officesV 5(b)filling of, authorization forV 5judges, court of appealVI 16(d) judges, superior courtVI 16(c) judges, supreme courtVI 16(d) bills—12-day return period for vetoIV 10(b) vetoIV 10budget, submission ofIV 12(Ay)commutation of sentence, granting ofV 8(Ay) compensationIII 8(Ay), 8(g),8(h), 8(i), 8(l)V 14(Ay), 14(d), 14(e)GArticleSectioncourts of appeal candidates, nomination ofVI 16(d)election ofV 2, 11elections, special, calling ofII 8(c), 9(c)eligibility for officeV 2employees of, civil service exemption forVII 4(f)executive assignments, authorization forV 6executive power vested inV 1gifts: restrictionsV 14(c) governor-elect, preparation of budget byIV 12(b)governor-elect’s failure to take office, acting governor uponV 10honorarium: prohibitionV 14(b) impeachment of, lieutenant governor to act duringV 10 information from executive officers, agencies, etc., re duties, requiring ofV 4initiative measures, calling of special election forII 8(c)laws, faithful execution ofV 1 legislature—report to and recommendationsV 3special sessions, calling ofIV 3(b)vacancy in, calling of election to fillIV 2(d) lobbyingV 14(e) militia—calling out ofV 7commander in chief ofV 7office of, qualifications forV 2pardons, granting ofV 8(Ay)parole of convicted murderer, review ofV 8(b) proclamations—legislative special session, calling ofIV 3(b) recall election, calling ofII 15(Ay)recall ofII 17referendum measures, calling of special election forII 9(c) reorganization of functions among executive officers and agencies, authorization forV 6report to legislature and recommendationsV 3reprieves, granting ofV 8(Ay)succession to office of—war- or enemy-caused disasterIV 21(b)supreme court candidates, nomination ofVI 16(d)temporary disability, lieutenant governor to act duringV 10term of officeV 2 University of California board of regents, selection of, advisory commit- tee re: membershipIX 9(e)University of California, ex officio regent of theIX 9(Ay)vacancies, appointments to fillV 5vacancy in office of, succession whenV 10veto of billsIV 10GRAND JURIESsummoned once each yearI 23GRANDCHILDRENproperty transfers from grandparents XIII A 2(h)GRANDPARENTSproperty transfers to grandchildren XIII A 2(h)GRANTSimpairment of taxing power prohibitedXIII 31institutions not state managed or controlled, appropriations for purpose or benefit ofXVI 3 tidelandsX 3HArticleSectionHABEAS CORPUSjurisdiction, originalVI 10writ of, only suspended for the public safetyI 11HANDICAPPED PERSONS. See PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSONS. HARBORS, BAYS, ETC. frontage or tidal lands of, prohibition against exclusion of right of way, etc., toX 4tidelands fronting on, grant or sale to private persons, etc., ofX 3HEALTHCARE, RESEARCH AND PREVENTION TOBACCO TAX ACT OF 2016, CALIFORNIA XIII B 14HEATmunicipal corporations, operation, etc., of public works byXI 9(Ay)regulation and control, as public utility subject toXII 3HENRY E. HUNTINGTON LIBRARY AND ART GALLERY. SeeHUNTINGTON LIBRARY.HIGH SCHOOLS. See also EDUCATION; SCHOOLS.district incorporation, organization, etc. IX 14HIGHWAYSmotor vehicle fees and taxes: useXIX 3motor vehicle fuel taxes, use ofXIX 2 XIX B 2HOMEOWNERS’ PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONXIII 3(k), 6, 25HOMESsearches and seizures, unreasonable, prohibitedI 13HOMESTEADSsale, forced, protection fromXX 1.5HORSE RACINGregulation by legislatureIV 19(b)HOSPITALSappropriations for benefit ofXVI 3appropriations for purpose or benefit of institutions not state managed or controlled XVI 3buildings under constructionXIII 4(b), 5construction by public agencies and nonprofit corporations, funds for XVI 3funds, federal and state, for construction ofXVI 3loans for improvement, etc., guarantee ofXVI 4property exempt from taxationXIII 4(b), 5public aid to sectarian, etc., prohibited 5HOTELSalcoholic beverages, sale, etc., ofXX 22HOUSEHOLDERS’ PERSONAL PROPERTYtax exemptionXIII 3(m)HOUSING, LOW RENT. See LOW RENT HOUSING PROJECTS.HUNTINGTON LIBRARYrights, powers, privileges, etc. XX 2taxation, exemption fromXIII 4(c)HYDROCARBON SUBSTANCESgolf courses, nonprofit, assessor’s consideration in assessingXIII 10IArticleSectionIMMUNITIES. See also PRIVILEGES; PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES.judicial performance, commission on: members, staff, etc. VI 18(h)legislator’s immunity from civil processIV 14sovereign immunity: limitations: prescribing of procedure for claims against counties, cities, and their officers, etc. XI 12IMPEACHMENT governorV 10judges as subject toIV 18(b)procedure reIV 18reprieve, pardon, and commutation of sentenceV 8(Ay)state officers as subject toIV 18(b)IMPORTATIONalcoholic beveragesXX 22IMPRISONMENT FOR DEBT prohibitedI 10IMPRISONMENT FOR TORTI 10IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC. See PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.INALIENABLE RIGHTS people’sI 1INCOMEblind, aid to, not to be construed as income to any other personXVI 3INCOME TAXESassessment and collection from persons, corporations, etc. XIII 26(Ay) exemptions—bond interest, state or local governmentXIII 26(b)nonprofit educational institutions of collegiate gradeXIII 26(c) nonprofit organizationsXIII 26(d)school, health care, and local public safety funding: temporary income tax increaseXIII 36INDEBTEDNESS. See also BONDS.city, county, etc., limitations on XVI 18evidences of: taxationXIII 2IArticleSectionINDEBTEDNESS—continued government spending limitation: indebtedness existing or authorized as of January 1, 1979 XIII B 8(g)interest, principal, registration, etc. XI 11(b)local government, limitations on XIII A 1(b)state, limitations on XVI 1 INDIAN TRIBES gaming on tribal lands IV 19(f)INDICTMENT judges VI 18(Ay)prosecution by I 14, 14.1 INDIGENT PERSONS aged, state support of institutions for XVI 3 INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENT COMMISSION ratification and confirmation of 4workers’ compensation disputes, settlement of 4INDUSTRIAL LOAN COMPANIES loans: interest ratesXV 1public moneys, deposit ofXI 11(b)INFORMATION executive officers, agencies, etc., duties of: governor’s requirementV 4newspersons’ refusal to disclose unpublished informationI 2(b)offenses, prosecution byI 14right of access to governmental informationI 3 INHERITANCE separate propertyI 21INITIATIVE. See also REFERENDUM. applicabilityII 8(e), 8(f), 11charter commissions, election ofXI 3(c)charters, county or city, drafts or revisions ofXI 3(c)charters, county or city, repeals or amendments toXI 3(b)cities or counties, electors ofII 11conflicting measures, highest affirmative vote prevails whenII 10(b) constitution— amendment of XVIII 3naming of individuals or private corporations prohibitedII 12 criminal case proceduresI 30(b)definition and procedure reII 8effective date 10(Ay) electionsII 8(c)local taxes, assessments, fees, charges XIII C 3manner petitions circulated, etc., providing ofII 10(e)one subject onlyII 8(d)petition setting forth text, submission ofII 8(b)relief laws, amendment, etc., of XVI 11 reserve powers of peopleIV 1secretary of state, duties ofII 8(c)signatures: percent required II 8(b)statutes, initiative, amendment or repeal ofII 10(c)title and summary preparation by attorney generalII 10(d) validity of provisionsVII 11(d) X B 16INLETS. See HARBORS, BAYS, ETC.INMATE LABOR XIV 5 INSTITUTIONS appropriations for purpose or benefit of institutions not state managed or controlledXVI 3inmate and patient help: civil service exemptionVII 4(j)IArticleSectionINSTITUTIONS—continuedpublic aid to sectarian, etc., prohibited 5right to inquiry, state’s, re management of institutionsXVI 3INSURANCE ASSOCIATIONS. See also ASSOCIATIONS.insurer, inclusion in definition of 28(Ay)INSURANCE COMMISSIONER compensationV 14(e)gifts: restrictionsV 14(c) honorarium: prohibitionV 14(b) lobbyingV 14(e)INSURANCE COMPANIESinsurer, inclusion in definition of 28(Ay)state compensation insurance fund: inclusion in definition of insurer ..XIII 28(Ay) taxation. See INSURERS.INSURANCE POOLING ARRANGEMENTSlocal governmental agenciesXVI 6INSURERS definitionXIII 28(Ay)motor vehicle registration and license feesXIII 28(f) taxation—annual tax, basis of theXIII 28(c)annual tax imposedXIII 28(b)annual tax, rate of 28(d)board of equalization, assessment byXIII 28(h)fraternal benefit societiesXIII 28(f)in lieu tax, exceptions toXIII 28(f)intent of section re gross premiums, less return premiums, received XIII 28(j) investmentsXIII 28(c)legislature may change rate by majority voteXIII 28(i)ocean marine insurersXIII 28(f), 28(g) reciprocityXIII 28(f)title and non-title insurers, basis of the annual tax forXIII 28(c)INTERESTbonds, state or local government: income tax exemptionXIII 26(b)indebtedness, evidences of: taxationXIII 2insurers, as exception to basis of annual tax forXIII 28(c)loans: ratesXV 1public bondsXI 11(b)rates, restrictions onXV 1state indebtednessXVI 1taxes claimed illegal, recovery of tax paid and interestXIII 32INTERPRETERcriminal proceedingsI 14INTIMIDATIONlegislator’s vote, felony to influenceIV 15INVESTIGATIONSjudicial performance, commission onVI 18(h), 18(i)public utilities commissionXII 2INVESTMENTS definitionXIII 28(c)insurers, as exception to basis of annual tax forXIII 28(c)public moneysXI 11(b)public pension or retirement fund XVI 17INVOLUNTARY SERVITUDEprohibited except for crimeI 6IRRIGATION DISTRICTSeminent domain proceedings for reservoir purposesI 14 foreign or domestic corporations, acquisition of stock of, re water rights, etc. XVI 6JArticleSectionJAILSinmate laborXIV 5JEOPARDY, DOUBLEI 15, 24JOURNAL, LEGISLATIVE. See LEGISLATURE—journals.JUDGES AND JUSTICES. See also COURTS; JUDICIAL OFFICERS.admonishment, privateVI 18(d), 18(f), 18.5appeal, courts of—number and presiding justiceVI 3appellate jurisdictionVI 11assignment to other courtsVI 6, 15bar, state, membership exceptionVI 9bar, state, membership preceding selectionVI 15 censureVI 18(d), 18(f)code of judicial ethicsVI 18(m)crime, commission ofVI 18(Ay), 18(c) disqualificationVI 18(Ay), 18(b), 18(d) electionVI 16eligibility for officeVI 15, 18(e)employment, public, ineligibility forVI 17impeachment, subject toIV 18(b)incumbent not on ballotVI 16(b)judicial appointments, commission on: membershipVI 7judicial council: membershipVI 6judicial performance, commission on: actions against, etc. VI 18(g)judicial performance, commission on: membershipVI 8law, practice of— prohibitionVI 17 suspensionVI 18(e)leave of absence re declaration of candidacy for public officeVI 17misconduct in officeVI 18(b), 18(d)nomination by governorVI 16original jurisdictionVI 10public office, other, ineligibility forVI 17 recallII 14(b) removalVI 18(Ay), 18(c),18(d), 18(e)reports to judicial councilVI 6 retirement—age or disabilityVI 18(Ay), 18(b),18(d), 18(e),18(f), 18(i), 20 allowanceVII 11 salariesIII 4(b)VI 18(Ay), 18(b),18(c), 19superior courts— numberVI 4JArticleSectionJUDGES AND JUSTICES—continuedsupreme court—chief justice—appellate court acting presiding justice, selection ofVI 3assignment of judges VI 15functions VI 2selection VI 2number VI 3suspension—law, practice of VI 18(e)office VI 18(c)teaching position, acceptance of VI 17temporary VI 21term of office VI 16vacancies VI 16JUDGMENTScourts of appeal: concurrence of 2 judges VI 3death judgment, appellate jurisdiction re VI 11interest rate XV 1libelous or slanderous campaign statement VII 10supreme court: concurrence of 4 judges VI 2when set aside VI 13JUDICIAL APPOINTMENTS, COMMISSION ONcourts of appeal judges, nominated or appointed, confirmation of VI 16(d)membership VI 7supreme court justices, nominated or appointed, confirmation of VI 16(d)JUDICIAL COUNCILadministrative director of courts, appointment of VI 6composition of VI 6courts of appeal decisions review by supreme court, rules re VI 12governor and legislature, recommendations to VI 6recommendations of VI 6JUDICIAL DISTRICTScourts of appeal VI 3JUDICIAL OFFICERSdiscipline VI 18.1fees or fines for own use prohibited VI 17retirement service credit from teaching positions VI 17JUDICIAL OFFICESnonpartisan II 6JUDICIAL PERFORMANCE, COMMISSION ONcomposition of VI 8(a)judges: censure, removal, retirement, etc. VI 18(a), 18(b),18(c), 18(d),18(e), 18(f),18(g), 18(h),18(i), 18(j),18(k), 18(l),18.5subordinate judicial officers: discipline VI 18.1term of office, member’s VI 8vacancies on, filling of VI 8(a)courts, vested inVI 1separation of powers III 3JURISDICTIONappellate jurisdiction VI 11courts of appeal VI 10 English language as official language of California: suits re enforce- mentIII 6original jurisdictionVI 10public school system, schools, colleges, etc., underIX 6superior courtsVI 10, 11supreme courtVI 10, 11, 12, 18(g)transfer of causeVI 12JURYgrand juries, yearly summoning ofI 23jurors, number of, in civil or criminal causesI 16trial by, right toI 16verdicts rendered in civil causes by three-fourths of juryI 16JUSTICE COURTS. See also COURTS.jurors, number of, in civil causesI 16JUSTICES. See JUDGES AND JUSTICES.KArticleSectionKINDERGARTEN SCHOOLS. See SCHOOLS—kindergartens.LLABORinmate laborXIV 5mechanics’ liens, enforcement of 3public works, 8-hour day onXIV 2LANDS. See also PROPERTY; REAL PROPERTY.acquisition of interest in, conformance to state water laws requisite to ... X 7assessment of lands separate from improvementsXIII 13fishing rights, reservedI 25homesteads and other property, protection from forced sale ofXX 1.5private, public aid in clearing debris, etc., fromXVI 6riparian ownersX 2tax exemption on debts secured byXIII 3(n)LANGUAGEEnglish as official language of CaliforniaIII 6LAWS. See CONSTITUTION, CALIFORNIA; STATUTES.LEASESpollution control facilities, environmental XVI 14LEAVES OF ABSENCEcourt of record judges: declaration of candidacy for public officeVI 17LEGAL COUNSELcriminal prosecutionsI 15, 24LEGISLATIVE BILLS. See LEGISLATURE—bills.LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL2 deputies or employees of, civil service exemption forVII 4(m)LEGISLATIVE POWERseparation of powersIII 3vested in senate and assemblyIV 1LEGISLATURE. See also ASSEMBLY; SENATE.academy of sciences, California: tax exemptionXIII 4(c)adjournment or recess—adjournment sine dieIV 3(a)day to dayIV 7(a)statutes, effect uponIV 8(c) 10 days, recesses for more than: consent of both housesIV 7(d)aged aid, encumbrances on property re, release, etc., of XVI 13LArticleSectionLEGISLATURE—continued aid, grant of, to institutions conducted for support, etc., of minor orphans, etc. XVI 3alcoholic beverage control, powers and duties reXX 22 assessment appeals boards, county, qualifications, membership, etc., on, providing forXIII 16banks, taxation of 27 bills—amended, printing before passage ofIV 8(b)amendment by title prohibitedIV 9 appropriation—budget bill passage beforeIV 12(c) one item onlyIV 12(d) restrictions onIV 12(c), 12(d) budget—appropriation bills, passage beforeIV 12(c)emergency bill passage beforeIV 12(c)failure to pass on timeIV 12(h)governor, item veto byIV 10(e) introductionIV 8(a), 12(c)passage by June 15 of each yearIV 12(c)introduction, hearing and action on 31st day afterIV 8(a) notice periodIV 8(b)presentation to governorIV 10(d)printing before passageIV 8(b)reading by title on 3 daysIV 8(b)statutes must be enacted byIV 8(b)30-day waiting period, suspension ofIV 8(a) titleIV 9 urgency— effective dateIV 8(c) vote requirements. See subheading, votes and voting.bingo games, authorization of cities and counties to provide forIV 19(c)blind, aid to, granting ofXVI 3boards of education, county or state, election or appointment ofIX 7boards of education, joint county, for two or more counties, election of.. IX 7 bonds—amendment or repeal of provisions reXVI 2(b)energy, financing of facilities for alternative sources of XVI 14.5environmental pollution control facilities, acquisition, etc., of XVI 14funds created for proceeds from, abolishment, etc., ofXVI 1.5general obligation bond proceeds fund: creation, accounts, etc. XVI 1.5interest, principal, registration, etc. XI 11(b)interest rate, maximum, on unsold, raising ofXVI 1 limitationsXIII 20 public bondsXI 11(b)school districts, issuance byIX 6budgets, state agency: controlIV 12(f)casinos, authorization of, prohibitedIV 19(e) caucusIV 7(c) churches, aid to, prohibited 5 cities—claims against, procedure reXI 12formation of, procedure forXI 2(a)powers, distribution between cities and legislature ofXI 13powers of, providing forXI 2(a)sales or use tax revenues, apportionment of 29LArticleSectionLEGISLATURE—continuedcity and county—sales or use tax revenues, apportionment of 29civil service veterans’ preference, providing forVII 6(a)claims of state agenciesIV 12(f)Cogswell polytechnical college tax exemptionXIII 4(c) committees—bill introduction: hearing or action after 31st dayIV 8(a)officers and employees of, civil service exemption forVII 4(a) proceedings—audio or video recording 7(c) open and publicIV 7(c) selection ofIV 11common carriers, regulation ofXII 3 compensation—expenses, living and travelIV 4grant of extra compensation or extra allowance, prohibitedIV 17 membersIV 4 salary adjustmentsIV 4constitution, amendments to: naming of individuals or private corpora- tions prohibited II 12constitution, amendments to, or withdrawal of amendments, procedure re XVIII 1constitutional convention, calling of XVIII 2convening in case of war- or enemy-caused disasterIV 21(c) corporations—common carriers, regulation ofXII 3stock subscription, authorization of, prohibited 6 taxation of 27 counties—appeals boards, assessment, creation, etc., of, providing forXIII 16assessors, elected, provision forXI 1(b)boundary change procedure, providing ofXI 1(a)claims against, procedure reXI 12consolidation of, providing forXI 1(a)district attorneys, elected, provision forXI 1(b)education, boards of—joint boards for two or more counties, providing for election of ..IX 7formation of, providing forXI 1(a)governing bodies, election and powers ofXI 1(b)municipal functions, performance of, providing forXI 8(a)powers, distribution between counties and legislature ofXI 13sales or use tax revenues, apportionment of 29sheriffs, elected, provision forXI 1(b)superintendents of schools—election by two or more countiesIX 3 qualifications, prescribing ofIX 3.1(a)counties or cities, distribution of powers between legislature andXI 13court judgments, interest rate uponXV 1courts of appeal—division of state into districts containingVI 3elective terms, first, of new district or division, providing ofVI 16(a)evidence, taking of, when jury trial waived, permission forVI 11judges, compensation for, prescribing ofVI 19opinions, publication of, providing forVI 14retirement of judges with allowances, providing ofVI 20credit, state, etc., giving or lending of, prohibited 6debts or liabilities, state, creation of, limitation onXVI 1LArticleSectionLEGISLATURE—continueddepositions: provisions for taking in criminal actionsI 15education, legislative policy re encouraging promotion ofIX 1 elections—disqualification of mentally incompetent, etc., electorsII 4free elections and registration, providing forII 3partisan offices, providing for elections forII 5practices, improper, prohibition ofII 4presidential primary, open, providing forII 5recall elections, providing forII 16residence re, defining ofII 3vacancies, calling elections to fillIV 2(d)eminent domain—public utilities, exercise against, compensation reXII 5employees, staff, etc.— civil service exemptionVII 4(a) classification or compensationIV 7(c) compensationIV 7.5 limitations on number and servicesIV 1.5 minimum wages and general welfare, providing forXIV 1safety and securityIV 7(c) English language as official language of California, enforcement of ...III 6executive assignment and reorganization by governor, provision by stat- ute for V 6expenditures, total aggregateIV 7.5 fish and game districts, providing ofIV 20(a)fishing seasons, etc., providing ofI 25 franchises— laws permitting leasing or alienation to relieve franchise of liabilities prohibited XX 4 taxation of 27gift of public money, etc., prohibited 6goals and objectives: reportIV 22 governor, office of, vacancy in: order of successionV 10governor’s report re condition of state and recommendationsV 3highway bond payments, use of motor vehicle revenues forXIX 6highway users tax account revenues: prohibition of use by legislature ... XIX 1homesteads, forced sale of, protection fromXX 1.5horse racing, regulation ofIV 19(b)hospital construction, funds for, authorization ofXVI 3hospitals, loans to, guarantee, etc., ofXVI 4Huntington, Henry E., library and art gallery tax exemptionXIII 4(c)impeachment, procedure reIV 18initiative. See also INITIATIVE.cities or counties, providing for exercise of initiative powers by elec tors inII 11manner petitions circulated, etc., providing ofII 10(e)reserve powers of peopleIV 1statutes, initiative, amendment or repeal ofII 10(c)interest rate exempted classes, authorization ofXV 1interest rate on judgmentsXV 1 journals— bills— passageIV 8(b)reading by title on 3 days: suspension of ruleIV 8(b)constitution, amendments to, or withdrawal of amendments XVIII 1constitutional convention, vote calling of XVIII 2each house shall keep and publishIV 7(b)LArticleSectionLEGISLATURE—continued judges, election of: providing unopposed incumbent’s name not appear on the ballotVI 16(b)judges of courts of record, salary increases, etc., forIII 4(b)judicial council, appointments toVI 6justice courts—jurors, number of, in civil causesI 16legislative authority vested inIV 1lotteries, authorization of, prohibitedIV 19(a)lottery, California state: authorization of establishmentIV 19(d) mass transit guideways, public: bond payments: use of motor vehicle revenues XIX 5mechanical arts, California school of, tax exemptionXIII 4(c)mechanics’ liens, providing for enforcement of 3 members—absent members, compelling attendance ofIV 7(a)allocation board, state, rights and duties reXVI 1civil process, not subject toIV 14 compensation— adjustmentsIV 4 aggregate expenditures: limitationIV 7.5 appearance before state government board or agencyIV 5(d) establishmentIII 8(a), 8(g),8(h), 8(i), 8(l) expenses, living and travelIV 4(b), 12(h)forfeiture due to failure to pass budget on timeIV 12(h) prohibited activitiesIV 5(d)conflict of interestIV 4(a), 5(c), 5(f)V 14(a) districtsIV 6 earned incomeIV 4(a)V 14(a) election— approval by houseIV 5(a) date ofIV 2(b)place of election same for senators and assembly membersIV 2(b) residency 2(c) termsIV 2(a) vacanciesIV 2(d)employment or office, other state, ineligibility forIV 13 expensesIV 4, 7.5expulsion by two-thirds voteIV 5(a)gifts: prohibition re acceptanceIV 5(c) honorarium: prohibition re acceptanceIV 5(b) incumbency, powers of: limitationsIV 1.5 influencing vote ofIV 15lobbying after leaving officeIV 5(e) mileageIV 4oath of officeXX 3office, vacant, when war- or enemy-caused disaster, filling ofIV 21(a) qualifications— approval by house IV 5(a) residence and citizenship 2(c) years of service, maximumIV 2(c) recall of II 14(b)LArticleSectionLEGISLATURE—continued members—continued retirement— allowanceVII 11 benefits, limitations onIV 1.5, 4(c), 4.5federal social security, participation inIV 4.5 terms, reductions in: effect on benefits, etc. XX 6safety and securityIV 7(c) suspension by two-thirds voteIV 5(a)terms, number ofIV 1.5, 2XX 7years of service, maximumIV 2(a), 2(c)minimum wages, providing forXIV 1motor vehicle revenues, allocation ofXIX 4 XIX A 1(g)navigable waters, state, attainable access toX 4 officers—civil service exemptionVII 4(a)each house to choose ownIV 7(a)oath of officeXX 3officers and employees, public: appointment, dismissal, etc. IV 7(c) physically handicapped persons, aid to, granting ofXVI 3private control, etc., of county or municipal improvements, etc., delega- tion of, prohibited XI 11(a)privileges and immunities, any special, revocation, etc., ofI 7(b) proceedings—audio or video recording 7(c)open and publicIV 7(c)property, forced sale of, protection fromXX 1.5public indebtednessXI 11(b)public moneys’ deposits in banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions, or industrial loan companies, providing for XI 11(b)public pension or retirement system— retirement board—investments, duty to prohibit certain XVI 17(g)members, prohibited actions re XVI 17(f)public utilities commission—additional powers, conferring ofXII 5eminent domain proceedings, compensation reXII 5plenary power conferred uponXII 5removal of commissioners by two-thirds voteXII 1public utilities control and regulation, conferring ofXII 5public utilities, eminent domain proceedings re, compensation inXII 5public utilities subject to control byXII 3public works, 8-hour day on, enforcement of 2quorum, compelling attendance forIV 7(a)recall of local officersII 19recall petitions, etc., providing forII 16 recess—10 days, recesses for more than: consent of both housesIV 7(d)referendum. See also REFERENDUM.cities or counties, providing for exercise of referendum powers by electors inII 11manner petitions circulated, etc., providing ofII 10(e)reserve powers of peopleIV 1statutes, referendum, amendment or repeal ofII 10(c)relief, administration of, providing for XVI 11religious sects, aid to, prohibited 5reserve fund, prudent state: establishmentXIII B 5.5LArticleSectionLEGISLATURE—continuedresolutions. See also RESOLUTIONS. committee selectionIV 11rules, adoption ofIV 7(a) sales or use tax revenues, local, contracts re apportionment of, authori zation forXIII 29 schools—average daily attendance, amount ofIX 6bond issuance by, prescribing ofIX 6common schools, providing system ofIX 5district incorporation and organization, providing forIX 14districts, classification ofIX 14governing boards, district, initiation, etc., of programs, etc., by, autho- rization forIX 14state school fund apportionmentsIX 6support of, providing forIX 5tax rates, authorization of 21sectarian purposes, aid for, prohibited 5 sessions—adjournment sine dieIV 3(a) closed sessionsIV 7(c) regularIV 3(a) specialIV 3(b), 10(f) staff. See subheading, employees, staff, etc. statutes. See STATUTES. subventions—mandated new programs or higher levels of service XIII B 6property tax homeowners’ exemption, revenue losses due toXIII 25property tax payment postponement on residences of persons age 62 years or older or disabled, revenue losses due toXIII 8.5subversives, disqualification of, re office or employment: enforcement .VII 9(a)superior courts— judges— compensation, prescribing ofVI 19 number, prescribing ofVI 4retirement allowances, providing ofVI 20service in more than one court, providing forVI 4officers and employees of, providing forVI 4officers, appointment of, providing forVI 22 supreme court—justices, compensation for, prescribing ofVI 19officers, appointment of, providing forVI 22opinions, publication of, providing forVI 14retirement of justices with allowances, providing ofVI 20tax lien cessation or presumption of payment of taxes after 30 years ..XIII 30 taxation— banksXIII 27 boundaries, state, changes, etc., property involved inXIII 23charitable purposes, exemption re property used exclusively forXIII 4(b), 5church property parking lots as tax exempt, providing forXIII 4(d) corporationsXIII 27disaster areas, assessment or reassessment of taxable property in, au thorization of 15forest trees, immature, taxation or exemption of, provisions reXIII 3(j) franchisesXIII 27historical significance, promoting preservation of property of 8homeowners’ property tax exemption, increase or decrease of 3(k)LArticleSectionLEGISLATURE—continued taxation—continuedhomeowners’ property tax exemption, reimbursement of localgovernment for revenue losses reXIII 25 hospital purposes, nonprofit, exemption of property used exclusively for XIII 4(b), 5indebtedness, evidences of, providing forXIII 2interest, providing forXIII 2legislation carrying out constitutional provisionsXIII 33local government taxes: use, etc. .XIII 24motor vehicle fuel taxes, revenues from, expenditures reXIX 4motor vehicle revenues: allocation XIX B 2ocean marine insurers, assessment, levy, etc., re, providing forXIII 28(g)postponement of tax payments on residences of persons 62 years or older or disabledXIII 8.5property on secured and unsecured rolls, adjustment of rate to maintain equality betweenXIII 12(b)property, personal, classification or exemption of, providing forXIII 2property tax rate maximums, establishment of 20rain water capture system, construction or addition of: exclusion XIII A 2(c)redevelopment project taxable property XVI 16religious purposes, exemption of property used exclusively forXIII 4(b), 5renters, benefits to, increase of 3(k)single-family dwellings, valuation of 9solar energy system, active, construction or addition of: exclusion.. XIII A 2(c)stock, providing for taxation of 2subversive persons or groups, exemption for, prohibitedVII 9(a)tidelands not used for navigable purposes, sale ofX 3transportation investment fund revenues, use of XIX B 1vacancies, calling elections to fillIV 2(d)vacancies in constitutional offices, confirmation of governor’s appoint- ments to fill V 5(b)votes and voting—earned income, effect onIV 4(a) V 14(a)felony to influence by bribery, etc. IV 15legislators, limitations onIV 4(a), 5(d)V 14(a) majority vote required—alcoholic beverage control appeals board member, removal ofXX 22alcoholic beverage control, director of, removal ofXX 22banks, act imposing tax onXIII 27bill passageIV 8(b)corporations, act imposing tax onXIII 27fish and game commission member, removal ofIV 20(b)franchises, act imposing tax onXIII 27insurers, rates of taxes imposed uponXIII 28(i) rollcall vote—bill consideration before 31st dayIV 8(a) bill passageIV 8(b)constitution, amendments to, or withdrawal of amendments XVIII 1constitutional convention, calling of XVIII 2 impeachment convictionsIV 18(a) journal, entered inIV 7(b)3 day reading of bills by title, suspension ofIV 8(b) urgency statutesIV 8(d) veto overrideIV 10(a)LArticleSectionLEGISLATURE—continuedvotes and voting—continuedTwo Thirds vote required— appropriations, general fundIV 12(d) bills—3 day reading by title, suspension ofIV 8(b) urgency clauseIV 8(d) veto overrideIV 10(a)bonds, general obligation, raising maximum interest rate onXVI 1constitution, amendments to, proposal of XVIII 1constitutional convention, calling of XVIII 2debts or liabilities, state, law to authorizeXVI 1delta protection act, statutes affectingX A 4 expulsion of memberIV 5(a)fish and wildlife protection, statutes affectingX A 2 impeachment convictionsIV 18(a)Medi-Cal hospital reimbursement improvement act of 2013, amending or repealingXVI 3.5personnel board, state: removal of memberVII 2(a)property, personal, classification or exemption re assessment and taxationXIII 2public utilities commission members, removal ofXII 1Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, existing water rights in, statutes af- fectingX A 2 suspension of memberIV 5(a)taxes, changes in state: rate increases or computation methods ... XIII A 3travel and living expenses of membersIV 4(b) urgency statutesIV 8(d) veto overrideIV 10(a) water resources development system, state, statutes affecting opera tion of X A 2 wild and scenic rivers system, state, initiative statute affecting water export from X A 3¾ vote required—bill consideration before 31st dayIV 8(a)war- or enemy-caused disaster, providing for needs resulting fromIV 21 water, beneficial use, etc., of: enactment of laws in furtherance of policy X 2workers’ compensation disputes, settlement of, providing forXIV 4workers’ compensation, system of, creation, etc., of 4LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR UNIVERSITY. See STANFORD UNIVERSITY, LELAND, JR.LIABILITYcounties, city and county, etc.: tort liability or public liability losses: in- surance pooling arrangement XVI 6libelous or slanderous campaign statementVII 10LIBELelected officials campaign statementVII 10LIBRARIESHuntington, Henry E., library and art gallery—rights, powers, privileges, etc. XX 2taxation, exemption fromXIII 4(c) public—property taxation, exemption fromXIII 3(d)LICENSES, PERMITS, ETC.alcoholic beveragesXX 22motor vehicles. See MOTOR VEHICLES.LIENSmechanics’ liens. See MECHANICS’ LIENS.tax lien cessation or presumption of payment of taxes after 30 years ..XIII 30LArticleSectionLIEUTENANT GOVERNOR compensation III 8(a), 8(g),8(h), 8(i),8(l)V 14(a), 14(d), 14(e)election ofV 11 employees of, civil service exemption for VII 4(f)gifts: restrictions V 14(c) governor, succession when vacancy in office of V 10 honorarium: prohibition V 14(b) lobbying V 14(e)office of, qualifications for V 9 president of senateV 9recall duties re recall of governor II 17 term of office V 11 University of California, ex officio regent of the IX 9(a)vacancy in office of, appointment to fillV 5(b)vote in case of tie, casting ofV 9 LIGHT AND POWER municipal corporations, operation, etc., of public works byXI 9(a)regulation and control as public utility XII 3 LIQUOR CONTROL. See ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.LOANS credit, public, lending of, prohibited 6hospitals, hospital facilities, etc., guaranteed forXVI 4personal, family, or household purposes: interest ratesXV 1real property purchase, construction or improvement: interest rates XV 1 LOBBYING legislator who has left officeIV 5(e) state officer, secretary of an agency or director of a department appointed by the governorV 14(e)LOBBYISTS citizens compensation commission, California: prohibited membership . III 8(b)legislator’s earned income from IV 4(a)V 14(a), 14(d)LOCAL GOVERNMENT bonding limitationsXIII 20XIII A 1(b)recall of officersII 19revenue allocationsXIII 25.5XIX C 1, 2, 3, 4subventions: useXIII 24tax imposition by legislature, prohibitedXIII 24 taxation—bonds, interest on: income tax exemptionXIII 26(b) homeowners’ property tax exemption revenue losses: reimbursement XIII 25proceeds: prohibition of use by legislatureXIII 24property exempt fromXIII 3(b)property tax rate maximumsXIII 20 XIII A 1(b)public safety services, imposition forXIII 35, 36 voter approvalXI 14XIII C 1, 2, 3XIII D 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6transportation funds XIX A 2LOTTERIESCalifornia state lotteryIV 19(d) prohibitionIV 19(a)tribal landsIV 19(f)LOW RENT HOUSING PROJECTS constitutionality of article re XXXIV 3legislation to facilitate operation of article re XXXIV 2persons of low income, definition of XXXIV 1public body, state, definition of XXXIV 1scope of article re XXXIV 4ArticleSectionMALFEASANCE IN OFFICE exclusion from officeVII 8(b)MANDAMUS jurisdiction, originalVI 10MANDATORY AND PROHIBITORY constitutional provisionsI 26 MANUFACTURE alcoholic beveragesXX 22MARINE CORPS. See MILITARY, NAVAL, ETC., SERVICE; VETERANS.MARINE RESOURCES protectionX B 1, 2, 3, 4,5, 6, 7, 8,9, 10, 11,12, 13, 14,15, 16 MARRIAGE definitionI 7.5property, separateI 21MASS TRANSIT GUIDEWAYS, PUBLIC motor vehicle fees and taxes: useXIX 3(b)motor vehicle fuel taxes, use of, re planning, construction, etc. XIX 2(b)motor vehicle revenues, allocated, use for: voter approvalXIX 5planning and researchXIX 2(b), 5MECHANICAL ARTS, CALIFORNIA SCHOOL OF taxation, exemption fromXIII 4(c)MECHANICS public works, 8-hour day onXIV 2 MECHANICS’ LIENS enforcement of XIV 3 MEDI-CAL HOSPITAL REIMBURSEMENT IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2013XVI 3.5MEDICAL RESEARCH regenerative medicine, California institute for XXXV 1, 2, 3, 4,5, 6, 7MEETINGS citizens compensation commission, CaliforniaIII 8(f)public bodies, meetings of: public access to informationI 3University of California, regents of theIX 9(g)MENTALLY INCOMPETENT PERSONSelectors, prohibition against exercising privilege ofII 4MERIT SYSTEMcivil serviceVII 1(b)MILITARY. See also MILITARY, NAVAL, ETC., SERVICE; MILITIA; VETERANS.army, standing, shall not be keptI 5civil office, limitations on holding ofVII 7powers subordinate to civilI 5quartering ofI 5MILITARY, NAVAL, ETC., SERVICEveterans, property of, tax exemption forXIII 3(o), 3(p),3(q), 3(r),3.5, 4(a)MArticleSectionMILITIAgovernor as commander in chief ofV 7members: exemption from civil serviceVII 4(k)statute, provision byV 7MINES, MINERALS, ETC.golf courses, nonprofit, assessor’s consideration in assessingXIII 10MINIMUM WAGES. See SALARIES, WAGES, ETC.MINORS. See CHILDREN.MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICEnew trial, granting ofVI 13MONEY. See also APPROPRIATIONS; FUNDS; REVENUES, STATE.depositories for public moneysXI 11(b)gift of public money, prohibited 6 institutions not state managed or controlled, appropriations for purpose or benefit of XVI 3schools, sectarian or denominational, public money for, prohibitedIX 8XVI 5MORTGAGES taxationXIII 2MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL TAXES. See TAXES—motor vehicle fuel. MOTOR VEHICLESair pollutionXIX 3(a) fees and taxes— administration and enforcement purposes, use forXIX 3(a) allocation ofXIX 4 fuel taxes. See TAXES—motor vehicle fuel. legislative acts authorizing use ofXIX 4license fees: allocation to counties and citiesXI 15 pollution control, use forXIX 3(a) property acquired by use of revenues fromXIX 9state property purchased with tax revenues, transfer of surplus XIX 11street and highway purposes, use forXIX 3 XIX D 1transportation, use for XIX D 1noise emissionsXIX 3(a)MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS. See also CITIES; LOCAL GOVERNMENT.churches, aid to, prohibited 5private control, etc., of municipal functions prohibitedXI 11(a) property of— grant or donation for any religious sect, etc., prohibited 5public utilities— establishment, purchase, etc., of, authorization forXI 9(a) regulations reXI 9(b) service outside boundaries, furnishing ofXI 9(a)religious sects, aid to, prohibited 5sectarian purposes, aid for, prohibited 5tideland sales toX 3MUNICIPAL COURTS unification with superior courtsVI 23MURDERparole of convicted murderer: review by governorV 8(b) MUSEUMS academy of sciences, California: exemption from taxationXIII 4(c) free museums: property tax exemptionsXIII 3(d)NArticleSectionNATIONAL OR ETHNIC ORIGIN business, etc., disqualification because of national or ethnic origin, prohibited I 8discrimination or preferential treatment because of: prohibitionI 31NAVIGABLE WATERSaccess, attainable, for the peopleX 4eminent domain, taking of frontages byX 1free navigationX 4 frontage or tidal lands of, prohibition against exclusion of right of way, etc., toX 4NAVY. See MILITARY, NAVAL, ETC., SERVICE; VETERANS.NETS, FISH. See FISH AND GAME. NEW TRIALS miscarriage of justiceVI 13 NEWS MEDIA. See PRESS; PUBLICATIONS.NONPROFIT COOPERATIVE ASSOCIATIONS. See also ASSOCI- ATIONS.loans: interest ratesXV 1NONPROFIT CORPORATIONS hospital construction, etc., loans for, guarantee, etc., ofXVI 4hospital construction, state money forXVI 3NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONSincome tax exemptionXIII 26(d)NOTEStaxation, etc. XIII 2OArticleSectionOATHS OF OFFICE public officers and employeesXX 3OFFENSES prosecution on information or indictmentI 14, 14.1 OFFICEbribery, disqualification forVII 8(a) bribery, etc., convictions, exclusion from office forVII 8(b) county and city, nonpartisanII 6crimes, exclusion forVII 8(b) dual officeholding re civil office of profit prohibitedVII 7judicial, nonpartisanII 6 legislature, members of, as ineligible for other state offices or employmentIV 13 libelous or slanderous campaign statement, disqualification or forfeiture forVII 10 malfeasance in office, exclusion forVII 8(b) naming of individual by law or constitutional amendment prohibited .II 12 oath or affirmation of, prescribedXX 3 overthrow of government, etc., advocation of, as disqualification from holding VII 9(a)partisan, primary election forII 5removal by impeachmentIV 18(b) school, nonpartisanII 6subversives, disqualification ofVII 9(a)terms— citizens compensation commission, California, membersIII 8(d) commencement ofII 20 judicial council membersVI 6judicial performance, commission on, membersVI 8 limitationsIV 1.5, 2V 2, 11 IX 2XX 6, 7OArticleSectionsalary reduction prohibitionIII 4(a)urgency statutes creating or abolishing: prohibitionIV 8(d) vacancy in, appointment by governor to fillV 5war- or enemy-caused disaster, filling of offices duringIV 21(d)OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES, PUBLIC. See also CALIFORNIA, STATE OF—officers. appointment, dismissal, etc. IV 7(c) bribery, disqualification forVII 8(a) bribery, etc., convictions, exclusion from office forVII 8(b) cities— charter provisions reXI 5(b) claims against, procedure reXI 12 compensationXI 5(b) compensation or allowance, extra, prohibited IV 17XI 10(a)oath or affirmation of officeXX 3subversives, disqualification ofVII 9(a) civil service, inclusion inVII 1(a) compensation or allowance, grant of extra, prohibitedIV 17XI 10(a)constitutional officers. See CONSTITUTIONAL OFFICERS. counties—charter provisions reXI 4(c), 4(e)claims against, procedure reXI 12 compensationXI 1(b) compensation or allowance, extra, prohibitedIV 17XI 10(a) elected officersXI 1(b), 4(a), 4(c)oath or affirmation of officeXX 3subversives, disqualification ofVII 9(a) crimes, exclusion forVII 8(b) English language as official language of California: preservation and enhancement III 6 judicial— fees or fines for own use: prohibitionVI 17 oath or affirmation of officeXX 3retirement service credit from teaching positionsVI 17 libelous campaign statement, disqualification or forfeiture of office for . VII 10 malfeasance in office, exclusion forVII 8(b) oath or affirmation of officeXX 3overthrow of government, etc., advocation of, as disqualificationVII 9(a) pensions. See PENSIONS.property qualification as requirement for holding office: prohibition ..I 22 recall ofII 13, 14, 15, 16,17, 18, 19 retirement. See RETIREMENT. slanderous campaign statement, disqualification or forfeiture of office forVII 10 state officers— bribery, disqualification forVII 8(a) budget informationIV 12(b) compensationIII 8V 14(a), 14(d), 14(e) definitionIII 8(l) deputy or employees of, civil service exemption forVII 4(c) election, time ofV 11 executive assignments by governor, authorization forV 6executive officers: governor may require information re dutiesV 4exemption from civil serviceVII 4(c), 4(f) free, etc., transportation passes for, prohibitedXII 7impeachment, subject toIV 18(b) lobbyingV 14(e)oath or affirmation of officeXX 3overthrow of government, etc., advocation of, as disqualificationVII 9(a) recall: expenses of officer not recalledII 18 recall procedureII 14(a) relief, administration of XVI 11 salaries, reductions in, prohibitedIII 4(a) terms V 11XX 7vacancies in office, appointments to fillV 5subversives, disqualification ofVII 9(a) superintendent of public instruction, election, etc., ofIX 2OLD AGE SECURITY AND AID. See AGED AID. OPEN SPACE LANDS assessment practices consistent with restriction and useXIII 8preservation, etc., of, policy reXIII 8ORCHARDS tax exemption: fruit and nut trees under four yearsXIII 3(i) ORDINANCES cities— charter provisions reXI 5(a)enforcement, etc., authorization forXI 7 counties— enforcement, etc., authorization forXI 7governing bodies, compensation forXI 1(b) officers, compensation forXI 1(b) replacement dwelling: transfer of base year value to another county XIII A 2(a)seismic safety XIII A 2(a)P ArticleSectionPAPERSsearches and seizures, unreasonable, prohibitedI 13PARDONSgovernor, grant byV 8(a)PARENTSdeceased veteran, parents of: property tax exemptionXIII 3(q)property transfers to children XIII A 2(h)PARKING AUTHORITIESfacilities, public, additional security re cost of XVI 15PARKING FACILITIES, PUBLIC financing XVI 15PARKING LOTSreligious worship, automobile parking for: tax exempt real property ...XIII 4(d)PARKS AND RECREATION, DEPARTMENT OFsurplus state property transfer to XIX 10PAROLEfelonies, nonviolentI 32governor’s review of parole of convicted murdererV 8(b)PAWNBROKERSloans: interest ratesXV 1PENSIONSfederal pensions for the aged, authorization for state co-operation re .. XVI 10 public employees’ retirement system. See PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM.public pension funds: investment XVI 17unfunded liabilities of state-level pension plans XVI 20PEOPLE’S RIGHTS. See RIGHTS, PEOPLE’S.PERSONAL PROPERTY. See also PROPERTY.assessment, levy, and collection of taxes onXIII 2brokers: loans: interest ratesXV 1classifications and exemptions re assessment and taxationXIII 2householder’s exemptionXIII 3(m)tax rate when unsecured, etc. XIII 12taxes on, ratio of total appropriations raised byXIII 22University of California, management and disposition byIX 9(f)PERSONAL PROPERTY BROKERSloans: interest ratesXV 1PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OFcitizens compensation commission, California: staffing, etc. III 8(k) PERSONNEL BOARD, STATE. See also CIVIL SERVICE, STATE.appointment ofVII 2(a)classifications, establishment ofVII 3(a)county, city, etc., work previously performed by: employees’continuation in position under state civil serviceVII 6(c)executive officer, administration of civil service statutes byVII 3(b)executive officer, appointment ofVII 2(c)exempt positions, prior, persons in, continuation ofVII 6(b)powers and dutiesVII 3presiding officer, election ofVII 2(b)probationary periods, establishment ofVII 3(a)PETITION, RIGHT OFguaranteed to peopleI 3PETITIONS initiativeII 8(b)judicial performance, commission on, decisions: reviewVI 18(a), 18(d) recallII 14, 15(a),15(b), 16 referendumII 10(e)IV 8(c)right of petition guaranteed to peopleI 3PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSONS. See also BLIND PERSONS; DISABLED PERSONS.aid forXVI 3PIPELINESassessment, etc. XIII 19POLICEcity charter provisions reXI 5(b)PArticleSectionPOLITICAL PARTIESelection rightsII 5POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES, ENVIRONMENTALrevenue bond issuance re acquisition, etc. XVI 14POLLUTION CONTROL, MOTOR VEHICLEmotor vehicle fees and taxes: use for enforcement of laws regulating air and noise emissionsXIX 3(a)POSTMASTERcivil office, limitations on holding ofVII 7POWER. See LIGHT AND POWER.PREFERENTIAL TREATMENTpublic employment, education, or contracting: prohibitionI 31PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY, OPENproviding ofII 5PRESSfreedom of, guaranteedI 2(a)liberty of, law may not abridge or restrainI 2(a) refusal to disclose information sources, not to be adjudged in contempt for I 2(b)PRESUMPTIONStax lien cessation or payment of taxes after 30 yearsXIII 30PRINTING. See also PUBLICATIONS.bills, legislative— requirementsIV 8(b) PRISONS credit earning for good behavior and rehabilitative or educational achievements I 32inmate laborXIV 5nonviolent felonies, prisoners who have committed: parole consideration I 32PRIVACY criminal defendantI 24inalienable rightI 1PRIVATE PROPERTY. See PROPERTY.PRIVILEGES. See also IMMUNITIES; PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNI TIES.habeas corpus, writ ofI 11urgency statute granting special privilege: prohibitionIV 8(d)PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES. See also IMMUNITIES; PRIVILEGES.certain special, may not be grantedI 7(b)revocation, etc., of any special, by legislatureI 7(b)PROBABLE CAUSEsearches and seizuresI 13PROCESS, CIVILlegislative members: immunityIV 14PROFESSIONdisqualification because of sex, race, etc., prohibitedI 8PROHIBITION, WRIT OFjurisdiction, originalVI 10PROPERTY. See also LANDS; PERSONAL PROPERTY; REAL PROPERTY.aged aid, encumbrances on property re, release, etc., of XVI 13assessments, fees, charges: voter approvalXIII C 1, 2, 3XIII D 1, 2, 3, 4,5, 6 due process of law, no deprivation withoutI 7(a)inalienable right to acquire, etc. I 1PArticleSectionPROPERTY—continuedmarriage, property acquisition by gift, will, etc., during, as separate ...I 21marriage, property owned before, as separateI 21motor vehicle tax revenues, property purchased withXIX 9noncitizens, rights ofI 20private property, compensation for taking by eminent domain ofI 19qualifications for electors prohibitedI 22sale, forced, protection fromXX 1.5sales or transaction taxes on real property sales prohibitedXIII A 3, 4state property acquired by expenditure of certain tax revenues, transfer of surplus XIX 10state property, surplus: saleIII 9 taxation. See TAXES.PROPERTY TAXATION. See TAXES—personal property; property.PUBLIC AGENCIES. See also CITIES; CITY AND COUNTY; COUN TIES; LOCAL GOVERNMENT; MUNICIPAL CORPORA TIONS; TOWNS AND TOWNSHIPS.hospital construction, etc., loans for, guarantee, etc., ofXVI 4hospital construction, state money forXVI 3PUBLIC AID. See AGED AID; BLIND PERSONS; CALIFORNIA, STATE OF.PUBLIC CORPORATIONS. See also CORPORATIONS.bar, stateVI 9civil service exempt positionsVII 4(b)PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM board of administration—citizens compensation commission, California: staffing, etc. III 8(k) PUBLIC HOUSING PROJECT LAWconstitutionality of article re XXXIV 3low rent housing project, definition of XXXIV 1persons of low income, definition of XXXIV 1public body, state, definition of XXXIV 1scope of article re XXXIV 4PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTSassessment, special, for XVI 19PUBLIC SAFETYhabeas corpus, suspension ofI 11local government services: fundingXIII 35, 36victims’ bill of rightsI 28PUBLIC UTILITIESassessments, etc. XIII 19city regulationsXI 9(b)commission. See PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION.eminent domain proceedings, compensation reXII 5municipal corporations, establishment, etc., byXI 9(a)rates. See PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION.regulation and control ofXII 3 taxationXIII 19PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSIONaccounts, uniform system of, prescribing ofXII 6appointment ofXII 1books and records of railroad, etc., companies, examination ofXII 6 eminent domain proceedings, fixing of compensation reXII 51 deputy or employee of, civil service exemption forVII 4(m)powers and dutiesXII 2public utility rates, fixing ofXII 6 rates—fixing of, authorization forXII 4, 6increases, consent forXII 4transportation fares and charges, establishment of, authority forXII 4regulation of public utilitiesXII 3 removal of commissioners by legislature, two-thirds vote requirement for XII 1PUBLIC WORKSarchitectural and engineering servicesXXII 1, 28-hour day on, and exception toXIV 2utilities, establishment by municipal corporation ofXI 9(a)PUBLICATIONS. See also PRINTING.ballot pamphlets: state indebtednessXVI 1courts of appeal, opinions ofVI 14journals of each legislative houseIV 7(b)liberty of the pressI 2(a)supreme court, opinions ofVI 14PUNISHMENTcruel or unusual, death penalty not deemed asI 27cruel or unusual, imposition ofI 24cruel or unusual, must not be inflictedI 17PURCHASESUniversity of California, purchases of materials, goods, etc., by: com petitive bidding proceduresIX 9(a) QArticleSectionQUARRIESgolf courses, nonprofit, assessor’s consideration in assessingXIII 10 RArticleSectionRACEbusiness, etc., disqualification because of race, prohibitedI 8discrimination or preferential treatment because of: prohibitionI 31RADIO STATIONSnews reporters’, etc., refusal to disclose information sources: adjudged in contempt prohibited I 2(b)RAFFLEScharitable purposes, forIV 19(f)RAILROADSassessment, annual, of property of 19dining or club cars, sale, etc., of alcoholic beverages inXX 22REAL ESTATE BROKERSloans: interest ratesXV 1REAL PROPERTY. See also LANDS; PROPERTY.cities, counties, etc., property of. See CITIES—property of; CITY AND COUNTY—property of; COUNTIES—property of.governmental agency’s acquisition of interest in, conformance to state water laws requisite to X 7loans: purchase, construction or improvement: interest ratesXV 1motor vehicle revenues, expenditures re, property acquired byXIX 9private property. See PROPERTY. taxes. See TAXES.University of California, management and disposition byIX 9(f)University of California, sales by: competitive bidding proceduresIX 9(a), 9(f)RECALLelection, procedure reII 15local officers, recall ofII 19officers, publicII 13, 14, 15, 16,17, 18, 19petitions, qualification ofII 14(b)RECESS legislature. See LEGISLATURE.RECIPROCAL OR INTERINSURANCE EXCHANGESinsurer, inclusion in definition of 28(a)reciprocity re taxation of insurersXIII 28(f)RECIPROCITY insurersXIII 28(f)RECOGNIZANCErelease of person on his or her own in the court’s discretionI 12, 28RECREATIONopen space lands assessmentXIII 8REDEVELOPMENT. See COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT.REDISTRICTINGdefense of certified mapXXI 3legislature, duties ofXXI 1, 2REFERENDUM. See also INITIATIVE.cities or counties, electors ofII 11conflicting measures, highest affirmative vote prevails whenII 10(b)county governing body compensation, ordinance for, subject toXI 1(b)definition and procedure reII 9effective date 10(a)IV 8(c)manner petitions circulated, etc., providing ofII 10(e)reserve powers of peopleIV 1secretary of state, duties ofII 9(c)signatures: percent requiredII 9(b)statute not delayed when referendum petition filedII 10(a)statutes, referendum, amendment or repeal ofII 10(c)submission ofII 9(b), 9(c)title and summary preparation by attorney generalII 10(d)REGENERATIVE MEDICINE, CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE FORestablishment, etc.XXXV 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,6, 7RELIEFjudicial performance, commission on, decisionsVI 18(g)laws re, administration of XVI 11RELIGIONbuildings under construction for purposes of: exemption from taxation .. XIII 3(f), 4(b), 5business, etc., disqualification because of religion, prohibitedI 8free exercise, etc., ofI 4 public aid for school, institution, etc., controlled by religious sect, etc., prohibited 5taxation exemption re property used exclusively for religious purposes .. XIII 3(f), 4(b),4(d), 5RENTALSwater: regulation by stateX 5RENTERStax benefitsXIII 3(k)REPLACEMENT DWELLINGStransfer of base year valueXIII A 2(a)REPORTSgovernor’s report to legislature each calendar yearV 3judges’ reports to judicial councilVI 6law enforcement officers’ reports to attorney generalV 13parole of convicted murderer, review by governor ofV 8(b)reprieves, pardons, and commutations, governor’s granting ofV 8(a)RArticleSectionREPRIEVESgrant by governor ofV 8(a)RESEARCHmass transit guideways, publicXIX 2(b), 5stem cell research XXXV 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,6, 7RESIDENCEcity, county, or public district employeesXI 10(b) electorsII 2, 3governor: 5 years state residence immediately preceding electionV 2legislative members: 3 years immediately preceding electionIV 2(c)RESOLUTIONSalcoholic beverage appeals board member, removal ofXX 22alcoholic beverage control, director of, removal ofXX 22energy alternative sources, limit, etc., on proposed bond issue for financ- ing for XVI 14.5 fish and game commission members, removal of, by concurrent resolu tionIV 20(b)legislative committees, selection ofIV 11state officers: compensationIII 8(g), 8(i) RESTAURANTSalcoholic beverages, sale, etc., ofXX 22RETIREMENTconstitutional officers— allowanceIII 7judges. See JUDGES AND JUSTICES—retirement. legislators— allowanceVII 11 cost-of-living increasesIV 4(c)federal social security, participation inIV 4.5 limitationsIV 1.5, 4(c), 4.5 reduction in terms of: effect on benefits, etc. XX 6postemployment benefits, prefundingXVI 20public employees’ retirement system. See PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM.public retirement funds: investment XVI 17 teachers—contributions and benefitsIX 6REVENUE MARINE SERVICE. See MILITARY, NAVAL, ETC., SERVICE; VETERANS.REVENUES, STATE. See also TAXES.budget estimatesIV 12(a)community college supportXVI 8general fund revenue estimatesIV 12.5school supportIX 6XVI 8, 8.5REVIEW. See also APPEALS.alcoholic beverage control, department of, decisions ofXX 22civil service, state, disciplinary actions reVII 3(a)courts of appeal decisionsVI 12judicial performance, commission on, decisionsVI 18(a), 18(d), 18(f)REWARDlegislator’s vote, influencingIV 15RIGHTS OF WAYnavigable waters, frontage or tidal lands ofX 4RIGHTS, PEOPLE’Said of counselI 14assemble, toI 3criminal casesI 15, 24, 29due processI 7(a) educationIX 1electors, as, qualifications forI 22equal protection of the lawsI 7(a), 24fish, toI 25government, alter or reformII 1 guaranteed by California Constitution as independent from United States ConstitutionI 24habeas corpus privilegeI 11 inalienableI 1information, governmental: accessI 3initiative powers reserved to peopleIV 1liberty of conscienceI 4navigable waters, access toX 2 noncitizensI 20petition, toI 3punishment, not to receive cruel or unusualI 17, 24referendum powers reserved to peopleIV 1religious worshipI 4reserved rightsI 24searches and seizures, unreasonable, prohibitedI 13speech and press, liberty ofI 2(a)stem cell research XXXV 5trial by juryI 16 voteII 2RIPARIAN RIGHTSstream or water coursesX 2ROAD REPAIR AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 2017 XIII B 15 XIX D 1RULESjudicial performance, commission on: judgesVI 18(i)legislature: proceedings of each houseIV 7(a)supreme court: code of judicial ethicsVI 18(m) SArticleSectionSACRAMENTO, CITY OFcapital of CaliforniaIII 2SACRAMENTO COUNTYconsolidation as charter city and countyXX 1water resources development, venue of actions or proceedings reX A 6SACRAMENTO-SAN JOAQUIN DELTAeminent domain proceedings to acquire contract rights for water or water quality maintenanceX A 5eminent domain proceedings to acquire water rights prohibitedX A 5fish and wildlife resource protectionX A 2protection of existing water rights, state’sX A 2statutes amending, repealing, etc., provisions re, approval ofX A 4SALARIES, WAGES, ETC. See also COMPENSATION.county superintendents of schoolsIX 3.1(b) judgesIII 4(b)VI 18(a), 18(b),18(c), 19minimum wagesXIV 1state officersIII 4(a), 8 teachers: not less than $2400 annuallyIX 6urgency statutes changing: prohibitionIV 8(d)SALES. See also PURCHASES.alcoholic beveragesXX 22food productsXIII 34homesteads, forced sale of, protection fromXX 1.5pollution control facilities, environmental XVI 14property, forced sale of, protection fromXX 1.5 tidelandsX 3 University of California, sales of real property by: competitive bidding procedures IX 9(a), 9(f)water: regulation by stateX 5SALES OR USE TAXESlocal public safety services, imposition forXIII 35, 36local sales tax rates and allocationsXIII 25.5revenue apportionment, etc., local governmental agency contracts re ..XIII 29schools, protection of: temporary sales tax increaseXIII 36SAN FRANCISCO BAYfish and wildlife resource protection in bay system westerly of delta ..X A 2SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATIONSpublic moneys, deposit ofXI 11(b)SCHOOLS. See also EDUCATION; TEACHERS.academy of sciences, CaliforniaXIII 4(c)apportionments re construction, etc., state allocation board legislative members’ duties re XVI 1 auditsXVI 8.5(e)average daily attendance—apportionment, minimum amountIX 6 boards of education, city: member qualifications, etc.: charter provi sionsIX 16boards of education, county, election, etc., ofIX 3.3, 7 bonds— indebtednessXIII A 1(b)XVI 18 issuance ofIX 6certificated employees—salaries, minimum, retirement, etc. IX 6church controlled, public aid to, prohibited 5Cogswell polytechnical collegeXIII 4(c)common schools, legislature to provide system ofIX 5common schools, sectarian or denominational doctrine prohibited in .IX 8county superintendents of—election or appointmentIX 3 qualificationsIX 3.1(a) salaryIX 3.1(b) districts—accountability report card, school: adoptionXVI 8.5(e)allocations from state school fundXVI 8.5audit of funds, annualXVI 8.5(e) bonds—indebtedness for public school repair, etc., purposes XVI 18 issuance, requirement reIX 6XVI 18classification of, legislature’sIX 14formation in more than one countyIX 6, 14governing boards, initiation, etc., of programs, etc., byIX 14governing boards, powers ofIX 14high school district incorporation, organization, etc. IX 14incorporation and organization, legislature’s power to provideIX 14SArticleSectionSCHOOLS—continued districts—continuedindebtedness or liability, limitations on XVI 18 supportXVI 8elementary schools—inclusion in public school systemIX 6 employees—victims’ bill of rightsI 28 enrollmentchanges in enrollment: allocationsXVI 8(f) free schoolsIX 5 funds— allocationsXVI 8.5 apportionment ofIX 6XVI 8, 8.5income and sales tax: temporary increaseXIII 36instructional improvement and accountability, expenditures forXVI 8.5(d)integration plan, continuance or commencement ofI 7(a) kindergartens—inclusion in public school systemIX 6mechanical arts, California school of 4(c)property of, tax exemption forXIII 3(d), 3(e), 5public school system— definitionIX 6protection of schools: temporary income and sales tax increasesXIII 36stabilization account, public school system; funding reserve XVI 21state school fund apportionmentsIX 6 supportIX 6XVI 8, 8.5transfer of school from system prohibitedIX 6pupil school assignmentI 7(a)pupil transportationI 7(a)religious creed, controlled by, public aid to, prohibited 5safe to attendI 28secondary schools—inclusion in public school systemIX 6sectarian or denominational, aid to, prohibitedIX 8XVI 5Stanford University, Leland, JrXX 2state colleges—inclusion in public school systemIX 6state school fund— apportionmentsIX 6 students—victims’ bill of rightsI 28superintendent of public instruction. See SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.support of, revenues forIX 6XVI 8, 8.5taxes, levy of 21teachers’ salaries not less than $2400 annuallyIX 6teaching staffs of certain, state civil service exemption forVII 4(i)technical schools—inclusion in public school systemIX 6 textbooks— adoption ofIX 7.5free of chargeIX 7.5University of CaliforniaIX 9SArticleSectionSEARCH WARRANTS issuanceI 13SEARCHES AND SEIZURESunreasonable, prohibitedI 13, 24SECRETARY OF STATEballot pamphlets re authorization of state indebtedness, printing ofXVI 1city charters, filing ofXI 3(a) compensationIII 8(a), 8(g),8(h), 8(i), 8(l) V 14(a), 14(d), 14(e)county charters, filing ofXI 3(a)election ofV 11gifts: restrictionsV 14(c)honorarium: prohibitionV 14(b) initiative measuresII 8(b), 8(c) lobbyingV 14(e)recall ofII 17recall petition signatures, continuous count ofII 14(c)referendum measuresII 9(b), 9(c)term of officeV 11vacancy in office of, appointment to fillV 5(b)SECURITIES. See also STOCKS.colleges, nonprofit: exemption from taxationXIII 3(e)parking meter revenues: availability for provision of public parking facilities XVI 15public moneys, investment ofXI 11(b)SEISMIC SAFETYproperty taxes: seismic retrofitting improvementsX B 2(c) taxable property reconstruction or improvement to comply with localordinance re XIII A 2(a)SELF-INCRIMINATIONI 15, 24SENATE. See also LEGISLATURE.adjournment or recess—adjournment sine dieIV 3(a)day to dayIV 7(a)10 days, recesses for more than: consent of other houseIV 7(d)bills. See also LEGISLATURE. budget bill—introduction by each houseIV 12(c) caucusIV 7(c) committees— proceedings—audio or video recording 7(c) open and publicIV 7(c) selection ofIV 11compensation of membersIV 4constitution, proposal of amendments to XVIII 1 districts—40 senatorial districts, division of state intoIV 6 reapportionment ofXXI 1employees of, civil service exemption forVII 4(a)goals and objectives: reportIV 22 governor’s appointments, confirmation of—alcoholic beverage control appeals board membersXX 22alcoholic beverage control, director ofXX 22constitutional offices, vacancies inV 5(b)fish and game commission membersIV 20(b)personnel board, state, members ofVII 2(a)SArticleSectionSENATE—continuedgovernor’s appointments, confirmation of—continuedpublic utilities commissionersXII 1University of California, regents of theIX 9(a)impeachment, trial byIV 18(a)journal ofIV 7(b)legislative power vested inIV 1 members—absent members, compelling attendance ofIV 7(a)civil process, not subject toIV 14 compensationIV 4conflict of interestIV 5 districtsIV 6 election— approval by houseIV 5(a) date ofIV 2(b) residency 2(c) termsIV 2(a) vacancyIV 2(d) expensesIV 4expulsion by two-thirds voteIV 5ineligibility for other state offices or employmentIV 13influencing vote ofIV 15judicial council, membership onVI 6 mileageIV 4oath of officeXX 3 qualifications— approval by houseIV 5(a) electorIV 2(c) residence and citizenship 2(c)years of service, maximumIV 2(c) recall ofII 14(b) retirementIV 4XX 6succession in war- or enemy-caused disasterIV 21(a) termsIV 2(a)XX 7vote of: felony to influence by bribery, etc. IV 15years of service, maximumIV 2(a), 2(c) membershipIV 2(a) officers—appointed, civil service exemption forVII 4(a) choosing ofIV 7(a) organizationIV 3(a)president of senate. See also LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR.lieutenant governor asV 9vote in case of tie, casting ofV 9president pro tempore— University of California board of regents, selection of, advisorycommittee re: membership and appointments IX 9(e) proceedings—audio or video recording 7(c)open and publicIV 7(c)quorum ofIV 7(a) rules— adoptionIV 7(a)rules committee— University of California board of regents, selection of, advisorycommittee re: appointmentsIX 9(e)SArticleSectionSENATE—continued sessions— closed sessionsIV 7(c) regularIV 3(a) specialIV 3(b)suspension by two-thirds voteIV 5(a)vacancy, election to fillIV 2(d)vote recordation in journalIV 7(b)SENTENCE, COMMUTATION OFgovernor, granting byV 8(a)SENTENCES parole. See PAROLE.prior criminal conviction: use for sentence enhancement purposes in criminal proceedingsI 28SEPARATE PROPERTYhusband and wifeI 21SEPARATION OF POWERSIII 3SEXdiscrimination or preferential treatment because of: prohibitionI 31disqualification re business, etc., because of sex prohibitedI 8University of California: debarred admission because of sex prohibited . IX 9(f)SEXUAL CRIMESassault, sexual: bailI 12SHERIFFSelected county sheriffsXI 1(b), 4(c)supervision by attorney generalV 13SHORT TITLES marine resources protection act of 1990X B 1SIGNATURESinitiative petitionsII 8(b)recall petitionsII 14(b), 14(c),15(a), 15(b), 16referendum petitionsII 9(b)SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGStaxation, property, assessment for purposes of 9SLANDERelected officials campaign statementVII 10SLAVERY prohibitedI 6SOCIAL WELFARE, DEPARTMENT OFaid to blind, enforcement of provisions reXVI 3SOLAR POWERfacilities utilizing, revenue bonds to finance XVI 14.5 property taxation: construction or addition of active solar energy system XIII A 2(c)SOLDIERSquartering ofI 5SOVEREIGN IMMUNITYlimitations: prescribing of procedure for claims against counties, cities, and their officers, etc. XI 12SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS. See also ASSESSMENTS.property acquisition for public use, proceedings re XVI 19public improvements, proceedings re XVI 19SPEECHfreedom of, guaranteedI 2(a)SArticleSectionSPENDING LIMITATION, GOVERNMENT. See APPROPRIATIONS—government spending limitation.STANFORD UNIVERSITY, LELAND, JR.rights, powers, privileges, etc. XX 2STATE AID. See AGED AID; BLIND PERSONS; CALIFORNIA, STATE OF—aid.STATE BAR OF CALIFORNIA. See BAR OF CALIFORNIA, STATE.STATE CAPITAL. See CAPITAL, STATE.STATE CAPITOL. See CAPITOL, STATE.STATE COLLEGES. See COLLEGES, STATE.STATE CONTROLLER. See CONTROLLER, STATE.STATE MANDATED LOCAL PROGRAMS.claims for mandated costs, payment of XVI 20 subventions XIII B 6STATE TREASURER. See TREASURER, STATE.STATE UNIVERSITY. See UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA.STATUTES administrative agencies: declaration of statute’s unenforceability or re- fusal to enforce statute prohibited III 3.5 bond issues, previous, constitutional provisions re: repeal andcontinuance as statutes XVI 2(b), 2(c)bond measures, submission to the electors ofXVI 2(a)charters, county or city: publishing in official state statutesXI 3(a) city and county, provisions for consolidation of county and citieswithin as XI 6(a)civil service statutes: enforcement by state personnel boardVII 3(a)compensation of state officersV 14(a), 14(d) constitutionality: declaration of unconstitutionality by administrative agency prohibitedIII 3.5corporations, laws concerning, alteration or repeal ofXX 5county chartersXI 4(d), 4(h)effective dateIV 8(c)enactment by billIV 8(b)enforcement: refusal by administrative agency prohibitedIII 3.5executive assignment and reorganization, governor’s authority forV 6governor’s signatureIV 10(a), 10(b)initiative statutes— effective date 10(a) proposal, etc. II 8local or special statute invalid if general statute applicableIV 16(b)militia, provision forV 7naming of individuals or private corporations prohibitedII 12 referendum—approval or rejection byII 9(a) effective date 10(a)IV 8(c) titles IV 9uniform operationIV 16(a)urgency statutesIV 8(c)STEM CELLSresearch, etc.XXXV 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,6, 7STOCKS. See also SECURITIES.irrigation districts, holdings byXVI 6mutual water companies or corporations, acquisition and holding ofishares in XVI 17state, etc., as stockholder, prohibitions re: exceptionsXVI 6taxation, etc. XIII 2STREETSmotor vehicle fees and taxes: useXIX 3motor vehicle fuel taxes: useXIX 2tidelands reserved to state for, sale ofX 3STRIKESinmate laborXIV 5SUBPOENASpublic utilities commission’s powers reXII 6SUBVENTIONShomeowners’ property tax exemption, revenue losses reXIII 3(k), 25local government: useXIII 24mandated new programs or higher levels of service: reimbursement of local government costs XIII B 6postponement of property tax payments on residences of persons 62 years or older or disabled, revenue losses reXIII 8.5SUBVERSIVESoffice or employment, public, disqualification fromVII 9(a)SUFFRAGE. See also ELECTIONS; VOTING.privilege of free, support ofVII 8(b)property qualifications, prohibitedI 22SUISUN MARSHfish and wildlife resource protectionX A 2SUITS AGAINST STATE permittedIII 5SArticleSectionSUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTIONaverage class size: determination for transfer or allocation of fundsXVI 8.5(a) compensationIII 8(a), 8(g),8(h), 8(i), 8(l)V 14(a), 14(d), 14(e)date of officeIX 2deputy and associates, nomination ofIX 2.1deputy and associates, terms ofIX 2.1 electionII 6IX 2 expenditures per student, annual: determination for transfer or allocation of funds XVI 8.5(a)gifts: restrictionsV 14(c)honorarium: prohibitionV 14(b) lobbyingV 14(e)teaching staff of schools under jurisdiction of: civil service exemption .VII 4(i)term of officeIX 2University of California, ex officio regent of theIX 9(a)vacancy in office of, appointment to fillV 5(b)SUPERINTENDENTS OF SCHOOLS, COUNTY. See COUNTY SUPERINTENDENTS OF SCHOOLS.SUPERIOR COURTS. See also COURTS.appellate divisionVI 4, 10, 11attorney general, prosecutions by: powers as district attorneyV 13certiorari, original jurisdiction inVI 10commissioners, appointment ofVI 22county clerk as ex officio clerk ofVI 4county, in eachVI 4court of recordVI 1habeas corpus proceedings, original jurisdiction inVI 10judges. See JUDGES AND JUSTICES.judicial power vested inVI 1jurisdiction, appellateVI 11jurisdiction, originalVI 10mandamus, original jurisdiction inVI 10officers, appointment ofVI 22prohibition, original jurisdiction inVI 10unification with municipal courtsVI 23water rights and water quality, actions reX A 6SUPREME COURT. See also COURTS. censure of judgesVI 18(d) certiorari, original jurisdiction inVI 10 commissioners, appointment ofVI 22 commutations for twice convicted felons, recommendations reV 8(a) composition ofVI 2convening ofVI 2court of recordVI 1death judgment, appellate jurisdiction reVI 11 decisions in writing that determine causesVI 14 governor, vacancy in office of: jurisdiction re succession, etc. V 10 habeas corpus proceedings, original jurisdiction inVI 10judges: code of judicial ethicsVI 18(m)judgment, concurrence necessary forVI 2judicial performance, commission on—actions against: jurisdictionVI 18(g) decisions: reviewVI 18(a), 18(d)members, appointment ofVI 8(a)judicial power vested inVI 1justices. See JUDGES AND JUSTICES. mandamus, original jurisdiction inVI 10 opinions, publication ofVI 14 pardons when second felony, recommendations reV 8(a) prohibition, original jurisdiction inVI 10 removal of judgesVI 18(a), 18(d), 18(e) retirement of judgesVI 18(a), 18(d)transfer of cases to, or from, other courtsVI 12 transfer of cause from one court or divisionVI 12water rights and water quality, actions reX A 6TArticleSectionTAXESactions re recovery of taxes claimed illegalXIII 32 alcoholic beverage sales, etc., collection, etc., of excise taxes onXX 22 apportionments— sales or use tax revenues, local, contracts reXIII 29appropriations raised by, ratio of totalXIII 22 aqueductsXIII 19 assessments. See ASSESSMENTS.banks and national banking associationsXIII 27 bonded indebtedness, city, county, etc., interest on XVI 18bonds, generallyXIII 2boundaries, state, changes, etc., property involved inXIII 23 canalsXIII 19 car companiesXIII 19  collections— legal or equitable process to prevent, prohibitedXIII 32 community redevelopment projects, taxable property re XVI 16 corporationsXIII 27 credits, solventXIII 2 debenturesXIII 2deeds of trustXIII 2districts, special, imposition of taxes on XIII A 4 ditchesXIII 19 electric companiesXIII 19 equalization, county boards of. See EQUALIZATION, COUNTY BOARDS OF. equalization, state board of. See EQUALIZATION, STATE BOARD OF. exemptions— academy of sciences, CaliforniaXIII 4(c) bonds— California, state of 3(c) governmental agenciesXIII 3(c) debts secured by landXIII 3(n) governmental agencies, property belonging toXIII 3(b) grape vines under three yearsXIII 3(i) householders’ personal propertyXIII 3(m)Huntington, Henry E., library and art galleryXIII 4(c) local government, property belonging toXIII 3(b) mechanical arts, California school of 4(c) property— buildings under construction— charitable purposes, buildings forXIII 4(b), 5 colleges, nonprofitXIII 3(e), 5 disabled persons accessibilityXIII A 2(c) hospitals, nonprofitXIII 4(b), 5 religious purposes, buildings forXIII 3(f), 4(b), 5 burial plots, etc., property used forXIII 3(g)charitable purposes, property used exclusively forXIII 4(b), 5 church propertyXIII 3(f), 5 church property parking lotsXIII 4(d) colleges, nonprofit, buildings, etc., of 3(e), 5 colleges, state, property used forXIII 3(d) community colleges, property used forXIII 3(d) crops, growingXIII 3(h) homeownersXIII 3(k), 25 XIII A 2(a) hospitals, nonprofit, property used exclusively forXIII 4(b), 5 libraries, public free, property used forXIII 3(d) low value real property: exemption by boards of supervisorsXIII 7museums, free, property used forXIII 3(d) 1975, appraised value after: newly constructed, ownershipchange, etc. XIII A 2(a) November 1, 1988, applicability to changes in ownership or new construction after XIII A 2(j) personal property, certainXIII 3(m) religious purposes, property used exclusively forXIII 3(f), 4(b),4(d), 5 schools, public, property used forXIII 3(d) seismic retrofitting improvementsXIII A 2(c) state, property belonging toXIII 3(a)universities, state, property of 3(d)TArticleSectionTAXES—continuedexemptions—continuedproperty—continued veterans— blind veteranXIII 4(a) disabled veteranXIII 3(o), 4(a) generallyXIII 3(o), 3(r), 3.5 parent of deceased veteranXIII 3(q) spouse of veteranXIII 3(o), 3(p), 4(a) waiversXIII 6subversive persons or groups, exemption for, prohibitedVII 9(b) trees— forest, immatureXIII 3(j)fruit, under four yearsXIII 3(i)nut, under four yearsXIII 3(i) vessels, certainXIII 3(l) flumesXIII 19 franchisesXIII 27gas companiesXIII 19golf courses, nonprofit, assessment of 10improvements and land separately assessed for purpose of 13income taxes. See INCOME TAXES.indebtedness, evidence of 2 insurers—annual tax, basis of theXIII 28(c)annual tax imposedXIII 28(b)annual tax, rate of 28(d)board of equalization, assessment byXIII 28(h) definitionsXIII 28(a)fraternal benefit societies28(f)in lieu tax exceptionsXIII 28(f)intent of section re gross premiums, less return premiums, received XIII 28(j) investments: definitionXIII 28(c)ocean marine insuranceXIII 28(f), 28(g)reciprocal or interinsurance exchangesXIII 28(a), 28(f) reciprocityXIII 28(f)state compensation insurance fundXIII 28(a)vote, legislative: majority requirement re passage of rate changeXIII 28(i) land—improvements separately assessedXIII 13local governmental agency, taxable land outside boundaries ownedby: valuation, etc. XIII 11legislature’s passing of laws to carry out constitutional provisionsXIII 33levy of, delegated to private person, etc., prohibitedXI 11(a) liens—cessation after 30 years, presumption reXIII 30local governmental agency property—assessment subsequent to 1968XIII 11improvements, replacement, etc., of, subsequent to March 1954,assessment of XIII 11land owned outside its boundaries, definition reXIII 11land owned outside its boundaries, valuation, etc., of 11lien date in 1967 deemed as lien date in 1966XIII 11voter approval of taxes, assessments, fees, chargesXIII C 1, 2, 3XIII D 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 water consumption or usage outside boundaries, limitations on,assessment, etc., of 11TArticleSectionTAXES—continued mortgagesXIII 2motor vehicle fees and taxes—license fees: allocation to counties and citiesXI 15 use ofXIX 3motor vehicle fuel— allocationXIX 4XIX B 2legislative acts authorizing use ofXIX 4XIX B 1mass transit guideway purposes, public, use forXIX 2(b)property acquired by use of revenues fromXIX 9repeal or reduction of taxesXIX 7state property purchased with tax revenues, transfer of surplus XIX 10street and highway purposes, use forXIX 2 XIX B 2transportation improvement, use for XIX B 2 notesXIII 2payment after 30 years, presumption reXIII 30personal property—classification of exemptionXIII 2 householder’sXIII 3(m)legislature’s provision forXIII 2rates, etc., re unsecured propertyXIII 12 pipelinesXIII 19power of taxation, suspension, etc., by grant or contract of, prohibited .XIII 31proceeds of taxes, definition of XIII B 8(c) property—assessment at full cash valueXIII 1assessment, place of 14base year values, transfer of XIII A 2(a) classification: waiversXIII 6 contaminated property XIII A 2(i)damaged or destroyed property, assessment or reassessment of 15 damaged or destroyed property: transfer of value to comparable property XIII A 2(a), 2(e),2(f), 2(i)disaster, property reconstructed after XIII A 2(a) exemptions. See subheading, exemptions.fire sprinkler, extinguishing or detection systems, or egressimprovement: exclusion XIII A 2(c)full cash value base to reflect inflationary rate XIII A 2(b)full cash value, definition of XIII A 2(a)historical significance, property of 8limitation, tax, effective date of provisions re XIII A 5limitation, tax, exceptions to XIII A 1(b)limitation, tax, severability of provisions re XIII A 6local government allocationsXIII 25.5maximum ad valorem tax of 1% of full cash value XIII A 1 1975, appraised value after: newly constructed, ownership change, etc. XIII A 2(a)November 1, 1988, applicability to changes in ownership or new con- struction after XIII A 2(j)ownership change due to eminent domain proceedings, etc. XIII A 2(d)postponement of tax payments on residences of persons 62 years or older or disabledXIII 8.5rain water capture system, construction or addition of XIII A 2(c)sales of real property: sales or transactions taxes prohibitedXIII A 3, 4, 7TArticleSectionTAXES—continued property—continuedseismic safety, reconstruction or improvement re: exclusion XIII A 2(a)solar energy system, active, construction or addition of XIII A 2(c)subject to taxationXIII 1, 2transfers between grandparents and grandchildren XIII A 2(h)transfers between parents and children XIII A 2(h)transfers between spouses XIII A 2(g) unsecured propertyXIII 12 valuation of assessable property: adjustments: change in assessment ratio XIII 3.5 voter approvalXI 14XIII C 1, 2, 3XIII D 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6publicly owned propertyXIII 11railroad companiesXIII 19 rates—basis of the annual tax, tax rate applied to the: insurersXIII 28(d) insurersXIII 28(a), 28(i)legislature’s providing of 20 unsecured propertyXIII 12renters’ tax benefitsXIII 3(k)sales or use taxes. See SALES OR USE TAXES. schools— districts— levy and assessmentXIII 21 state taxes: changes by rate increases or computation methods: vote requirement XIII A 3statutes providing tax levies effective immediatelyIV 8(c)stock, capitalXIII 2telegraph and telephone companiesXIII 19tobacco tax revenues XVI 23TEACHERScivil service, state, exemptionVII 4(i)retirement, contributions for, and benefits toIX 6salary, annual: not less than $2,400IX 6TECHNOLOGY. See COGENERATION TECHNOLOGY.TELEGRAPHassessment of property of telegraph companiesXIII 19regulation and control as public utilityXII 3TELEPHONEassessment of property of telephone companiesXIII 19regulation and control as public utilityXII 3TELEVISION STATIONSnews reporters’, etc., refusal to disclose information sources: adjudged in contempt prohibitedI 2(b)TERMS OF OFFICE. See OFFICE—terms.TESTIMONYcomment by courtVI 10TEXTBOOKS, PUBLIC SCHOOL. See SCHOOLS—textbooks.TIDELANDSexclusion of right of way, etc., prohibitedX 4sale of, restrictions onX 3TIME bills— budget bill—June 15th of each year, passage by midnight ofIV 12(c)deadline for governor’s signatureIV 10(b)presentation to governorIV 10(d) TArticle SectionTIME—continued budget—10 days of each calendar year, submitted by governor within first ...IV 12(a) citizens compensation commission, California: members: appointment, etc. III 8(d) constitutional amendment or revision—5 days after filing the statement of the vote, effective XVIII 4constitutional convention— 6 months from time of majority vote, legislature to provide forconvention within XVIII 2elections, recall— 60 days or more than 80 days from certification, election date not less thanII 15(a)180 days from certification, election date within: consolidation with next regularly scheduled electionII 15(b)6 months, no petition to be circulated or filed for another recall beforeII 18elective offices, constitutional— even-numbered year before expiration of term, holding of election onII 20 Monday after January 1 following election, commencement of terms onII 20governor’s appointments, confirmation of— 90 days, within, of submission of nomination, taking of office if nei- ther confirmed nor refused confirmation V 5(b)initiative measures— 131 days after qualifying, submission at next general election held at least II 8(c) judges—election, time of, and termsVI 16(a), 16(c)September 16, nomination of candidate by governor beforeVI 16(d) 30 days before August 16 next preceding expiration of term, filing a declaration of candidacy withinVI 16(d) 90 days, causes submitted but pending and undetermined for: salary suspensionVI 1910 years immediately preceding selection to court of record, member of state bar VI 15legislative members— process5 days before and after, and during, session, not subject to civilIV 14 legislature—1st Monday in December of even-numbered year, regular session to commence IV 3(a)November 30, adjournment sine die at midnight onIV 3(a)10 days, recesses for more than: consent of both housesIV 7(d) referendum—second calendar year of biennium, presentation duringII 9(b) 31 days after qualifying, submission at next general election held at least II 9(c)90 days after enactment date of statute, presentation withinII 9(b)superintendent of public instruction—1st Monday after January 1 next succeeding his election, begins duties of officeIX 2TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTScigarette and tobacco products surtax fund revenues, appropriations of .. XIII B 12taxation: general fund revenues XVI 23TArticleSectionTOWNS AND TOWNSHIPS bonds—indebtedness for public school repair, etc., purposes XVI 18issuance, requirements re XVI 18credit, giving or lending of, prohibited 6housing project, low rent, approval of XXXIV 1indebtedness or liability, limitations on XVI 18insurance pooling arrangement: joint powers agreement, etc. XVI 6sectarian, etc., purposes, aid for, prohibited 5tideland sales toX 3 tort liability or public liability losses: payment through insurance pooling arrangement XVI 6 unemployment insurance: payment through insurance pooling arrange ment XVI 6water supplied to, franchise to collect rates, etc., for use ofX 6 workers’ compensation: payment through insurance pooling arrangementXVI 6TRANSPORTATIONalcoholic beveragesXX 22 companies. See TRANSPORTATION COMPANIES. funds—enforcement of provisions re transportation fundingXIX C 1, 2, 3, 4loans or transfers: prohibition XIX A 1 XIX B 1 local transportation XIX A 2mass transit guideways, public. See MASS TRANSIT GUIDEWAYS, PUBLIC.municipal corporation, operation, etc., of public works byXI 9(a)plans, etc.—motor vehicle fuel sales tax revenue, use for XIX A 1 XIX B 2motor vehicle revenues, use forXIX 4 XIX D 1 railroads. See RAILROADS.road repair and accountability act of 2017 XIII B 15vessels, certain: exemption from taxationXIII 3(l)TRANSPORTATION COMPANIEScharges, etc., discrimination in, prohibitedXII 4charges, rates of, public utilities commission establishment ofXII 4free, etc., passes for public officers, prohibitedXII 7legislative control ofXII 3rate increasesXII 4TREASON definitionI 18evidence required for conviction ofI 18TREASURER, STATE compensationIII 8(a), 8(g),8(h), 8(i), 8(l)V 14(a), 14(d), 14(e)election ofV 11gifts: restrictionsV 14(c)honorarium: prohibitionV 14(b) lobbyingV 14(e) term of officeV 11vacancy in office of, appointment to fillV 5(b)TREASURY, STATE. See also FUNDS—state.bond issuance, funds created for proceeds from, abolishment, etc., of XVI 1.5bond proceeds fund, general obligation, creation, etc., ofXVI 1.5warrants on: appropriation requirementXVI 7TREESfruit and nut, under four years, exemption from taxation of 3(i)immature forest, exemption from taxation of 3(j)TRIAL BY JURY. See also TRIALS. guaranteedI 16TRIALScriminal cases, rights of defendant or the people inI 15, 24, 29impeachment tried by senateIV 18(a)judges, temporaryVI 21jury trials—number of jurorsI 16right of, guaranteedI 16waiver: criminal or civil causesI 16waiver: evidence and finding of facts by appellate courtsVI 11libelous or slanderous campaign statementVII 10new trials, granting of, when miscarriage of justiceVI 13original jurisdiction, courts havingVI 10workers’ compensation disputesXIV 4TRIBAL LANDS gamingIV 19(f)TRUSTS AND TRUSTEESbonds, etc., registration ofXI 11(b)insurers having trust departments, taxation of 28(f)UArticleSectionUNEMPLOYMENTrelief laws, etc. XVI 11UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE counties, city and county, etc.: payment through insurance pooling arrangementXVI 6UNITED STATESaged, pensions or aid for, state co-operation re XVI 10California as inseparable part ofIII 1constitution of: supreme lawIII 1hospital construction, federal-state funds forXVI 3housing projects, low rent, funds for XXXIV 1officeholder: civil office prohibitedVII 7 overthrow by force or violence, advocating: disqualification from public office, etc. VII 9water laws, state, conformance withX 7UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES. See COGSWELL POLYTECH-NICAL COLLEGE; COLLEGES, NONPROFIT; COL- LEGES, PRIVATE; COLLEGES, STATE; COMMUNITY COLLEGES, CALIFORNIA; STANFORD UNIVERSITY, LELAND, JR.; UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA. UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA alumni association, president and vice president of, as ex officio regents of the University of California IX 9(a)bidding procedures, competitive, re construction contracts, etc. IX 9(a)officers and employees—civil service, state, exemptionVII 4(h)oath or affirmation of officeXX 3subversives, disqualification ofVII 9(a)president, acting, as ex officio regent of the University of California ..IX 9(a) regents—advisory committee for the selection of theIX 9(e)appointments of additional members to board ofIX 9(c)composition of board ofIX 9(a), 9(d), 9(e) meetings, publicIX 9(g) powersIX 9 termsIX 9(b)trust, administration ofIX 9(f)sex, debarred admission because of, prohibitedIX 9(f)USURYinterest rate restrictions and exemptionsXV 1VArticleSectionVACANCIESattorney general, vacancy in office ofV 5(b)controller, state, office ofV 5(b)county charter provisions reXI 4(c), 4(e)courts of appeal judgesVI 16(d)elective officesVII 10equalization, state board ofV 5(b)fish and game commissionIV 20(b)governor, office of, during war- or enemy-caused disasterIV 21(b)governor, office of, succession reV 10governor’s appointments to fillV 5judicial councilVI 6judicial performance, commission onVI 8(a) legislatureIV 2(d)legislature when war- or enemy-caused disasterIV 21(a)lieutenant governor, office ofV 5(b)personnel board, stateVII 2(a)public utilities commissionXII 1secretary of state, office ofV 5(b)superintendent of public instruction, office ofV 5(b)superior court judgesVI 16(c)supreme court justicesVI 16(d)treasurer, state, office ofV 5(b)University of California, regents of theIX 9(b)VENUE water rights and water quality, actions or proceedings brought insuperior court re X A 6VERDICTScivil actions, trial by jury inI 16VESSELSalcoholic beverages, sale, etc., ofXX 22commercial passenger fishing boat: marine resources protection stamp X B 8(c), 8(d) taxation, exemption of certain fromXIII 3(l)VETERANSbusiness loans, state aid forXVI 6civil service preferenceVII 6(a)farms and homes, state aid for acquisition ofXVI 6tax exemption re propertyXIII 3(o), 3(p),3(q), 3(r),3.5, 4(a) VETO. See LEGISLATURE—bills.VICTIMS OF CRIMEbill of rightsI 28 VINESgrape, under three years, exemption from taxation of 3(i)VOCATIONdisqualification because of sex, race, etc., prohibitedI 8VOTING. See also ELECTIONS; LEGISLATURE—votes and voting; SUFFRAGE.civil service statutes, etc., state personnel board reVII 3(a) counted, right to have voteII 2.5 disqualificationII 4lieutenant governor: casting vote as president of senateV 9majority required— boards of education: member qualifications, etc.: city charter amendmentsIX 16bonded indebtedness for certain public school purposes XVI 18constitution, California, amendment or revision of XVIII 4constitutional convention, calling of XVIII 2general tax, localXIII C 2(b), 2(c)housing project, low rent, development, etc., of XXXIV 1indebtedness, state, authorization ofXVI 1mass transit guideways, public, use of motor vehicle revenues for ..XIX 5 property tax levy when local government boundary includes two or more countiesXI 14sales or use tax revenues, local, apportionments, contracts reXIII 29special benefit tax, local XIII D 6(c)right to voteII 2right to have vote countedII 2.5 secretII 7Two Thirds required bonded indebtedness— city, county, etc. XVI 18 local government XIII A 1(b)special benefit tax, local XIII D 4(g), 6(c)special tax, local XIII C 2(d)WArticleSectionWAGES. See COMPENSATION; SALARIES, WAGES, ETC.WAIVERSproperty tax exemptionsXIII 6WARpublic works, 8-hour day on, exception toXIV 2WAR-CAUSED DISASTERlegislative powersIV 21WARRANTScause, issue on probableI 13WARRANTS ON STATE TREASURYinstitutions not state managed or controlled, appropriations for purpose or benefit of: prohibited XVI 3moneys drawn by warrants onlyXVI 7WATERappropriations, etc., state regulation ofX 5city, county, etc., supplies to, collection of rates, etc., forX 6 conservationX 2ecological reservesX B 14 franchises, collection of rates, etc., byX 6 international water system, acquisition of control of: irrigation districts as stockholders XVI 6 lands, state, acquisition of interest in, conformance to state laws requisite to X 7municipal corporations, operation, etc., of public works byXI 9(a)navigable waters. See NAVIGABLE WATERS.ocean waters: definitionX B 2(c) private waters, public aid in clearing debris, etc., fromXVI 6 rain water capture system, construction or addition of: property taxation XIII A 2(c) regulation and control as public utilityXII 3resources, beneficial use ofX 2resources development—actions and proceedings brought in superior court, venue ofX A 6actions or proceedings pending in court, preference toX A 6delta protection act, statutes amending, repealing, etc. X A 4fish and wildlife resources. See FISH AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES.force and effect of provisions reX A 8guarantees and protections for water rights and water qualityX A 1Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, protection of existing water rights in . X A 2state agencies’ exercise of authorized powersX A 7 state water resources development system, operation to comply with water quality standards and control plans X A 2 wild and scenic rivers system, state, appropriations for storage in or diversion from X A 3riparian rightsX 2stock in mutual companies, public agency acquisition, etc., of XVI 17taxable lands owned by local governmental agency outside its bounda- ries: inclusion of water rights XIII 11WHARFAGEregulation and control as public utilityXII 3WIDOWS AND WIDOWERSspouse of veteran, property tax exemption forXIII 3(p), 4(a)WILD AND SCENIC RIVERS SYSTEM, CALIFORNIAwater exports into another hydrologic basin, prohibited appropriations of water for X A 3WILDLIFE RESOURCES. See FISH AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES.WILLSseparate propertyI 21WITNESSEScredibility of, comment onVI 10criminal cases, protection inI 30(b) defendant’s right toI 15, 24detention, unreasonable, prohibitedI 10testimony of, comment onVI 10treason, conviction ofI 18WORKERS’ COMPENSATIONcounties, city and county, etc.: payment through insurance pooling ar rangementXVI 6creation, enforcement, etc., of system reXIV 4disputes, settlement of, provisions reXIV 4WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUSsuspension ofI 11WRITINGSsupreme court and courts of appeal: decisions that determine causes ..VI 14 ZArticleSectionZONES AND ZONING marine resources protection zoneX B 2(d)single-family homes, assessment for property tax purposes of 9