Hello and welcome everybody! I am Aaron Schroeder
I am an Associate Research Professor in the Social Analytics Division of the Biocomplexity Institute here at the University of Virginia, and this marks my 5th year as co-director, along with Gizem, of the Data Science for Public Good Young Scholars Program. Just as interesting, as I notice myself on Zoom, I believe this also marks the first time since probably February that I have worn my "dress-up clothes" to work. Well, at least the top half.

So, this year brought us some exciting new FIRSTS. Not only the first time we've gone fully virtual but also the first time we've also gone both multi-university and international. While the plan at the beginning of the year was for UVA to advise and help coordinate the launching of these new DSPG programs, after being forced to go virtual, all of a sudden it made a whole lot of sense to attempt coordinating at a much more operational level for things like all of our training sessions, our Brownbag lectures, and, of course, this Symposium. 

By doing this, we found that we were able to take the best from what everybody had to offer, and WOW did that really amp up the overall quality of the trainings and the pace at which students were able to learn! Data Science has a lot of sub-specialties and, by coordinating across universities, we were able to cover all of them better than we ever had before. And, now, we have a terrific library of training materials for all of us to use going forward.

Now, if you know anything about university departments and their rich history of "COOPERATION", you will appreciate how amazing it is that we were all able to pull this off! And pull it off well! And that really speaks to how terrific our new DSPG partner institutions have been to work with.

As you might imagine, coordinating all this was a daunting experience at times. Gizem and I (mostly Gizem) had many meetings with the program leaders at the participating universities and learning how everybody works and what their expectations are is always a process, but in the end it was a very rewarding one because together we've created, in a very short time, something that is completely new, a "multi-university" "public good-oriented" "experiential" data science training program with literally dozens of projects occurring simultaneously across the U.S. and even across the ocean in Turkey!

Here at UVA, we have been happily surprised at how successfully the project teams were able to transition to a completely virtual work environment. And I don't just mean that in terms of the work, which was excellent, but also in terms of how they were able to bring the type of camaraderie and group humor that we have become accustomed to seeing develop over a summer when physically together, happen a completely virtual environment. Which really, I think, speaks to the incredibly high quality of students that we were so fortunate to have participate in our program. And I hear that the other programs had much the same experience.

Which is why Gizem and I are very excited to now be able to have students from these 6 separate DSPG programs share with all of you what they have been able to learn and achieve over these past 10 weeks. We thank you for coming!


I will now pass the mic over to Matt Holt / Cass Dorius from our partner institution at Virginia Tech / Iowa State University.







































BUDGET AMER SOLDIER
